Oh, for a muse of fire thatwould ascend
the brightest heaven ofinvention,
a kingdom for a stage, princesto act,
and monarchs to behold theswelling scene.
Then should the warlike Harry,like himself,
assume the port of Mars;
and at his heels, leash'd inlike hounds,
should famine, sword, and firecrouch for employment.
But pardon, gentles all,
the flat unraised spirits thathave dared
on this unworthy scaffold
to bring forth so great anobject.
Can this cockpit hold the vastyfields of France?
Or may we cram within thiswooden O
the very casques
that did affright the air atAgincourt?
Oh, pardon,
since a crooked figure
may attest in little place amillion,
and let us, ciphers to thisgreat accompt,
on your imaginary forces work.
Suppose within the girdle ofthese walls
are now confined two mightymonarchies,
whose high upreared and abuttingfronts
the perilous narrow ocean partsasunder.
Piece out our imperfections withyour thoughts.
Into a thousand parts divide oneman,
and make imaginary puissance.
Think, when we talk of horses,
that you see them printing theirproud hoofs
i' the receiving earth.
For 'tis your thoughts that nowmust deck our kings,
carry them here and there,jumping o'er times,
turning the accomplishment ofmany years
into an hourglass.
For the which supply, admit mechorus to this history,
who, prologue-like, your humblepatience pray,
gently to hear, kindly to judge,our play.
My lord, I'll tell you:
that self bill is urged
which in the 11th year of thelast king's reign
was like and had indeed againstus passed,
but that the scambling andunquiet time
did push it out of furtherquestion.
How, my lord, shall we resist itnow?
It must be thought on.
If it pass against us,
we lose the better half of ourpossession,
for all the temporal lands
which men devout by testamenthave given to the church
would they strip from us;
being valued thus:
as much as would maintain, tothe king's honor,
full 15 earls and 1,500 knights,
6,200 good esquires;
and to relief of lazars and weakage,
of indigent faint souls pastcorporal toil,
100 almshouses right wellsupplied;
and to the coffers of the kingbeside,
1,000 pounds by the year.
Thus runs the bill.
This would drink deep.
'Twould drink the cup and all.
But what prevention?
The king is full of grace andfair regard.
And a true lover of the holyChurch.
The courses of his youthpromised it not.
The breath no sooner left hisfather's body
but that his wildness, mortifiedin him,
seemed to die too.
Yea, at that very moment,
consideration like an angel came
and whipped the offending Adamout of him,
leaving his body as a paradise
to envelop and contain celestialspirits.
Never was such a sudden scholarmade.
Never came reformation
in a flood with such a headycurrance,
scouring faults.
Nor never Hydra-headedwillfulness
so soon did lose his seat, andall at once,
as in this king.
We are blessed in the change.
Hear him but reason in divinity,
and, all-admiring, with aninward wish
you would desire the king weremade a prelate.
Hear him debate of commonwealthaffairs,
you would say it hath been allin all his study.
List his discourse of war,
and you shall hear a fearfulbattle
rendered you in music.
Turn him to any cause of policy,
the Gordian knot of it he willunloose,
familiar as his garter;
that, when he speaks,
the air, a chartered libertine,
is still;
and the mute wonder lurketh inmen's ears
to steal his sweet and honeyedsentences
so that the art and practic'part of life
must be the mistress to thistheoric--
which is a wonder how His Graceshould glean it,
for his addiction was to coursesvain;
his companies unlettered, rude,and shallow;
his hours filled up with riots,banquets, sports;
and never noted in him anystudy, any retirement,
any sequestration from openhaunts and popularity.
How now for mitigation
of this bill urged by thecommons?
Doth His Majesty incline to itor no?
He seems indifferent,
or rather swaying more upon ourpart
than cherishing the exhibitersagainst us,
for I have made an offer to HisMajesty,
upon our spiritual convocation
and in regard of causes now inhand,
which I have opened to His Graceat large,
as touching France,
to give a greater sum
than ever at one time the clergyyet did
to his predecessors part withal.
How did this offer seemreceived, my lord?
With good acceptance of HisMajesty,
save that there was not timeenough to hear,
as I perceive His Grace wouldfain have done,
the severals and unhiddenpassages
of his true titles to somecertain dukedoms
and generally to the crown andseat of France
derived from Edward, hisgreat-grandfather.
What was the impediment thatbroke this off?
The French ambassador, upon thatinstant,
craved audience.
And the hour, I think, is cometo give him hearing.
Is it 4:00?
It is.
Then go we in to know hisembassy.
God and His angels guard yoursacred throne
and make you long become it.
Sure, we thank you.
My learned lord, we pray you toproceed
and justly and religiouslyunfold
why the law Salique that theyhave in France
or should or should not bar usin our claim.
And God forbid, my dear andfaithful lord,
that you should fashion, wrest,or bow your reading
or nicely charge yourunderstanding soul
with opening titles miscreate,
whose right suits
not in native colors with thetruth,
for God doth know how many nowin health
shall drop their blood inapprobation
of what your reverence shallincite us to.
Therefore, take heed how youimpawn our person,
how you awake our sleeping swordof war.
We charge you, in the name ofGod, take heed.
Then hear me, gracioussovereign,
and you peers
that owe yourselves, your lives,and services
to this imperial throne.
There is no bar to make againstYour Highness' claim to France
but this...
which they produce fromPharamond.
"In terram Salicam mulieres nesuccedant."
"No woman shall succeed inSalique land,"
which Salique land
the French unjustly gloze to bethe realm of France,
and Pharamond the found of thislaw and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfullyaffirm
that the land Salique is inGermany
between the floods of Sala andof Elbe,
where Charles the Great, havingsubdued the Saxons,
there left behind and settledcertain French,
who, holding in disdain theGerman women
for some dishonest manners oftheir life,
established then this law, towit,
no female should be inheritrixin Salique land--
which Salique, as I said, 'twixtElbe and Sala,
is at this day in Germany calledMeisen.
Then doth it well appear theSalique law
was not devised for the realm ofFrance,
howbeit they would hold up thisSalique law
to bar Your Highness claimingfrom the female
and rather choose to hide themin a net
than amply to imbar theircrooked titles
usurp'd from you and yourprogenitors.
May I with right and consciencemake this claim?
The sin upon my head, dreadsovereign,
for in the book of Numbers is itwrit,
"When the man dies,
let the inheritance descend untothe daughter."
Gracious lord,
stand for your own.
Unwind your bloody flag!
Look back into your mightyancestors.
Go, my dread lord, to yourgreat-grandsire's tomb,
from whom you claim.
Invoke his warlike spirit
and your great-uncle's, Edwardthe Black Prince.
Awake remembrance of thesevaliant dead,
and with your puissant arm renewtheir feats.
Your brother kings and monarchsof the earth
do all expect that you shouldrouse yourself,
as did the former lions of yourblood.
They know Your Grace hath causeand means and might,
so hath Your Highness.
Never king of England
had nobles richer nor more loyalsubjects,
whose hearts have left theirbodies
here in England
and lie pavilioned in the fieldsof France!
Oh, let their bodies follow, mydear liege,
with blood and sword and fire towin your right.
In aid whereof, we of thespiritualty
will raise Your Highness such amighty sum
as never did the clergy at onetime bring in
to any of your ancestors.
We must not only arm to invadethe French
but lay down our proportion todefend against the Scot,
who will make road upon us withall advantages.
There is a saying,
very old and true.
"If that you will France win,
then with Scotland first begin."
For once the eagle England beingin prey,
to her unguarded nest the weaselScot comes sneaking
and so sucks her princely eggs,
playing the mouse in absence ofthe cat
to tear and havoc more than shecan eat.
Well, it follows then, the catmust stay at home.
Yet that is but a crush'dnecessity,
since we have locks to safeguardnecessaries,
pretty traps to catch the pettythieves.
While that the armed hand dothfight abroad,
the advised head defends itselfat home.
For government, though high andlow and lower,
put into parts doth keep in oneconsent,
congreeing in a full and naturalclose,
like music.
Therefore doth heaven
divide the state of man indivers functions,
setting endeavour in continualmotion,
to which is fixed, as an aim orbutt, obedience,
for thus work the honey bees,
creatures that, by a rule innature,
teach the act of order to apeopled kingdom.
They have a king and officers ofsorts,
where some, like magistrates,correct at home;
others, like merchants, venturetrade abroad;
others, like soldiers, armed intheir stings,
make root upon the summer'svelvet buds,
which pillage they with merrymarch
bring home to the tent royal oftheir emperor,
who, busied in His Majesty,
surveys the singing masonsbuilding roofs of gold,
the civil citizens kneading upthe honey,
the poor mechanic porters
crowding in their heavy burdensat his narrow gate,
the sad-eyed justice, with hissurly hum,
delivering o'er to executorspale
the lazy yawning drone.
I this infer:
that many things,
having full reference to oneconsent,
may work contrariously,
so many a thousand actions onceafoot
end in one purpose
and be all well-borne withoutdefeat.
Therefore to France, my liege!
Divide your happy England intofour,
whereof take you one quarterinto France,
and you withal shall make allGallia shake.
If we, with thrice such powersleft at home,
cannot defend our own doors fromthe dog,
let us be worried
and our nation
lose the name of hardiness andpolicy.
Call in the messengers sent fromthe dauphin.
Now are we well-resolved,
and by God's help and yours,
the noble sinews of our power,
France, being ours,
#we'll bend it to our awe orbreak it all to pieces.
Now are we well-prepared
to know the pleasure of our faircousin dauphin,
for we hear your greeting isfrom him, not from the king.
May it please Your Majesty togive us leave
freely to render what we have incharge,
or shall we sparingly
show you far off
the dauphin's meaning
and our embassy?
We are no tyrant but a Christianking
unto whose grace our passion isas subject
as are our wretches fettered inour prisons.
Therefore, with frank and withuncurbed plainness,
tell us the dauphin's mind.
Thus, then, in few.
Your Highness, lately sendinginto France,
did order certain dukedoms
that you claimed of your greatpredecessor,
King Edward III.
In answer of which claim, theprince, our master,
says that you savor too much ofyour youth
and bids you be advised there'snought in France
that can be with a nimblegalliard won.
You cannot revel into dukedomsthere.
He therefore sends you, meeterfor your spirit,
this ton of treasure,
and in lieu of this
desires you let the dukedomsthat you claim
hear no more of you.
This the dauphin speaks.
What treasure, Uncle?
Tennis balls, my liege.
We are glad the dauphin is sopleasant with us.
His present and your pains wethank you for.
When we have matched our racketsto these balls,
we will, in France, by God'sgrace,
play a set shall strike hisfather's crown
into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a matchwith such a wrangler
that all the courts of Franceshall be disturbed with chaces.
And we understand him well,
how he comes o'er us with ourwilder days,
not measuring what use we madeof them.
We never valued this poor seatof England.
And therefore, living hence,
did give ourself to barbarouslicense,
as 'tis ever common that men aremerriest
when they are from home.
But tell the dauphin I will keepmy state,
be like a king,
and show my sail of greatness
when I do rouse me in my throneof France.
For that I have laid by mymajesty
and plodded like a man forworking days,
but I will rise there with sofull a glory
that I shall dazzle all the eyesof France...
yea, strike the dauphin blind tolook on us.
And tell the pleasant princethis mock of his
hath turned his balls togunstones,
and his soul shall stand sorecharged
for the wasteful vengeance thatshall fly with them,
for many a thousand widows shallthis, his mock,
mock out of their dear husbands,
mock mothers from their sons,
mock castles down.
And some are yet ungotten andunborn
that shall have cause to cursethe dauphin's scorn.
But this lies all within thewill of God,
to whom I do appeal
and in whose name, tell you thedauphin,
I am coming on to venge me as Imay
and to put forth my rightfulhand
in a well-hallow'd cause.
So get you hence in peace.
And tell the dauphin his jestwill savor but of shallow wit
when thousands weep more thandid laugh at it.
Convey them with safe conduct.
Fare you well.
This was a merry message.
We hope to make the sender blushat it.
Therefore, my lords, omit nohappy hour
that may give furtherance to ourexpedition,
for we have now no thought in usbut France,
save those to God, that runbefore our business.
Therefore, let our proportionsfor these wars
be soon collected
and all things thought upon
that may with reasonableswiftness
add more feathers to our wings,
for, God before,
we'll chide this dauphin at hisfather's door.
Now all the youth of England areon fire,
and silken dalliance in thewardrobe lies.
Now thrive the armorers,
and honor's thought
reigns solely in the breast ofevery man.
They sell the pasture now to buythe horse,
following the mirror of allChristian kings,
with winged heels, as EnglishMercuries,
for now sits expectation in theair
and hides a sword from hiltsunto the point
with crowns imperial,
crowns and coronets
promised to Harry and hisfollowers.
The French, advised by goodintelligence
of this most dreadfulpreparation,
shake in their fear
and with pale policy
seek to divert the Englishpurposes.
Oh, England,
model to thy inward greatness,
like little body with a mightyheart,
what mightst thou do-- thathonor would thee do--
were all thy children kind andnatural.
But see thy fault.
France hath in thee found out anest of hollow bosoms,
which he fills with treacherouscrowns,
and three corrupted men--
one Richard, Earl of Cambridge;
and the second, Henry, LordScroop of Masham;
and the third, Sir Thomas Grey,Knight of Northumberland--
have, for the gilt of France--oh, guilt indeed--
confirmed conspiracy withfearful France.
And by their hands,
this grace of kings must die
if hell and treason hold theirpromises
ere he take ship for France andin Southampton.
Linger your patience on,
and we'll digest the abuse ofdistance,
force a play.
The sum is paid,
the traitors are agreed,
the king is set from London,
and the scene is nowtransported, gentles,
to Southampton.
There is the playhouse now.
There must you sit,
and thence to France shall weconvey you safe
and bring you back,
charming the narrow seas to giveyou gentle pass,
for, if we may,
we'll not offend one stomachwith our play.
But, till the king come forthand not till then,
unto Southampton do we shift ourscene.
Well met, Corporal Nym.
What, are Ancient Pistol and youfriends yet?
For my part, I care not.
I say little,
but when time shall serve,
there shall be smiles.
But that shall be as it may.
I dare not fight,
but I will wink and hold outmine iron.
It is a simple one, but what,though?
It will toast cheese,
and it will endure cold asanother man's sword will,
and there's an end.
I will bestow a breakfast tomake you two friends,
and we'll be, all three, swornbrothers to France.
Let it be so, good Corporal Nym.
Faith, I will live so long as Imay,
that's the certain of it,
and when I cannot live anylonger,
I will do as I may.
That is my rest.
That is the rendezvous of it.
It is certain he is married toNell Quickly,
and certainly, she did youwrong,
for you was trothplight to her.
I cannot tell.
Things must be as they may.
Men may sleep,
and they may have their throatsabout them
at that time,
and some say knives have edges.
It must be as it may.
Though patience be a tired mare,yet she will plod.
There must be conclusions.
Well, I cannot tell.
How now, mine host, Pistol.
Base tike, call'st thou me host?
Now, by this hand, I scorn theterm.
Nor will my Nell keep lodgers.
No, by my troth,
for we cannot lodge or board
a dozen or 14 gentlewomen
that live honestly by the prickof their needles,
but it will be thought we keep abawdy house straight.
Ha!
Oh, well a day, Lady, if he benot drawn.
Now we shall see wilful adulteryand murder committed.
Good Lieutenant!
Good Corporal!
Offer nothing here.
Pish!
Pish for thee, Iceland dog,
thou prick-eared cur of Iceland.
Good Corporal Nym, show thyvalor.
Put up your sword!
Hear me!
Hear me what I say!
He that strikes the firststroke,
I'll run him up to the hilts, asI am a soldier.
An oath of mickle might,
and fury will abate.
Mine host Pistol, you must cometo my master,
and you, hostess.
He is very sick and would tobed.
Good Bardolph, put thy facebetween his sheets,
and do the office of a warmingpan.
Away, you rogue.
Faith, he's very ill.
By my troth,
he'll yield the crow a puddingone of these days.
The king has killed his heart.
Come, shall I make you friends?
We must to France together.
Why the devil should we keepknives
to cut one another's throats?
Let floods o'erswell and fiendsfor food howl on.
You'll pay me the 8 shillings Iwon of you at betting.
Base is a slave that pays.
That now I will have.
That's the humor of it.
As manhood shall compound.
Push home!
By this sword,
he that makes the first thrust,I'll kill him.
By this sword, I will.
A sword is an oath,
and oaths must have theircourse.
Corporal Nym, an thou wilt befriends,
be friends!
An thou wilt not, why, then, beenemies with me too.
Prithee, put up.
I shall have my 8 shillings Iwon of you at betting?
A noble shalt thou have andpresent pay,
and liquor likewise will I giveto thee,
and friendship shall combine andbrotherhood.
I shall live by Nym,
and Nym shall live by me.
Is not that just?
For I shall sutler be unto thecamp,
and profits will accrue.
Give me thy hand.
I shall have my noble.
In cash most justly paid.
Well, then, that's the humorof't.
As ever you come of women, comein quickly to Sir John.
Ah, poor heart.
He is so shaked of a burningquotidian tertian
'tis most lamentable to behold.
Sweet men, come to him.
The king hath run bad humors onthe knight.
That's the even of it.
Nym, thou hast spoke the right.
His heart is fracted andcorroborate.
The king is a good king,
but it must be as it may.
He passes some humors andcareers.
Let us condole the knight,
for, lambkins, we will live.
'Fore God, His Grace is bold totrust such traitors.
They shall be apprehended by andby.
How smooth and even they do bearthemselves,
as if allegiance in their bosoms
sat crowned with faith andconstant loyalty!
Shh.
The king hath note of all thatthey intend
by interception which they dreamnot of.
Nay, but the man that was hisbedfellow,
whom he hath dulled and cloyedwith gracious favors--
that he should, for a foreignpurse,
so sell his sovereign's life todeath and treachery.
Now sits the wind fair, and wewill aboard.
My Lord of Cambridge and my kindLord of Masham
and you, my gentle knight,
give me your thoughts.
Think you not that the powers webear with us
will cut their passage throughthe force of France,
doing the execution and the act
for which we have in headassembled them?
No doubt, my liege, if each mando his best.
I doubt not that, since we arewell persuaded
we carry not a heart with usfrom hence
that grows not in a fair consentwith ours
nor leave not one behind
that doth not wish success andconquest
to attend on us.
Never was monarch
better feared and loved than isYour Majesty.
There's not, I think, a subject
that sits in heart grief anduneasiness
under the sweet shade of yourgovernment.
True.
Those that were your father'senemies
have steeped their galls inhoney
and do serve you
with hearts create of duty andof zeal.
We therefore have great cause ofthankfulness
and shall forget the office ofour hand
sooner than quittance of desertand merit
according to the weight andworthiness.
So service shall with steeledsinews toil,
and labor shall refresh itselfwith hope
to do Your Grace incessantservices.
We judge no less.
Uncle of Exeter,
enlarge the man committedyesterday
that railed against our person.
We consider it was excess ofwine
that set him on,
and on his more advice, wepardon him.
That's mercy, but too muchsecurity.
Let him be punished, sovereign,
lest example breed, by hissufferance,
more of such a kind.
Oh, let us yet be merciful.
So may Your Highness, and yetpunish too.
Sir, you show great mercy if yougive him life
after the taste of muchcorrection.
Alas, your too much love andcare of me
are heavy orisons 'gainst thispoor wretch.
If little faults, proceeding ondistemper,
shall not be winked at,
how shall we stretch our eyewhen capital crimes,
chewed, swallowed, and digested,
appear before us?
We'll yet enlarge that man,
though Cambridge, Scroop, andGrey,
in their dear care
and tender preservation of ourperson,
would have him punished.
And now to our French causes.
Who are the late commissioners?
I one, my lord.
Your Highness bade me ask for ittoday.
So did you me, my liege.
And I, my royal sovereign.
Then, Richard, Earl ofCambridge,
there is yours;
there yours, Lord Scroop ofMasham;
and, Sir Knight Grey ofNorthumberland,
this same is yours.
Read them,
and know I know your worthiness.
My Lord of Westmoreland, UncleExeter,
we will aboard tonight.
Why, how now, gentlemen?
What see you in those papers
that you lose so muchcomplexion?
Look, ye, how they change.
Their cheeks are paper.
Why, what read you there thathave so cowarded
and chased your blood out ofappearance?
I do confess my fault
and do submit me to YourHighness' mercy.
To which we all appeal.
The mercy that was quick in usbut late
by your own counsel issuppressed and killed.
You must not dare, for shame, totalk of mercy,
for your own reasons turn intoyour bosoms,
as dogs upon their masters,worrying you.
See you, my princes and my noblepeers,
these English monsters.
My Lord of Cambridge here,
you know how apt our love was toaccord to furnish him
with all appurtenants belongingto his honor;
and this man hath for a fewlight crowns,
lightly conspired and sworn untothe practices of France
to kill us here in Hampton;
to the which this knight,
no less for bounty bound to usthan Cambridge is,
hath likewise sworn.
But, oh, what shall I say tothee, Lord Scroop?
Thou cruel,
ingrateful,
savage,
and inhuman creature?
Thou that didst bear the key ofall my counsels,
that knew'st the very bottom ofmy soul,
that almost mightst have coin'dme into gold,
wouldst thou have practised onme for thy use?
May it be possible that foreignhire
could out of thee extract onespark of evil
that might annoy my finger?
'Tis so strange that, though thetruth of it
stand off as gross as black andwhite,
my eye will scarcely see it.
Oh, how hast thou with jealousy
infected the sweetness ofaffiance.
Show men dutiful?
Why...
so didst thou.
Seem they grave and learned?
Why...
so didst thou.
Come they of noble family?
Why...
so didst thou.
Seem they religious?
Why...
so didst thou.
And thus, thy fall hath left akind of blot
to mark the full-fraught man andbest indued
with some suspicion.
I will weep for thee,
for this revolt of thine,methinks,
is like another fall of man.
Their faults are open.
Arrest them to the answer of thelaw,
and God acquit them of theirpractices.
Our purposes God justly hathdiscovered,
and I repent my fault more thanmy death,
which I beseech Your Highness toforgive
although my body pay the priceof it.
For me, the gold of France didnot seduce,
although I did admit it as amotive
the sooner to effect what Iintended.
But God be thanked forprevention,
which I in sufferance heartilywill rejoice,
beseeching God and you to pardonme.
Never did faithful subject
more rejoice at the discovery ofmost dangerous treason
than I do at this hour joy o'ermyself,
prevented from a damnedenterprise.
My fault, but not my body,pardon, sovereign.
God quit you in His mercy.
Hear your sentence.
You have conspired against ourroyal person,
joined with an enemy proclaimed,
and from his coffers receivedthe golden earnest of our death,
wherein you would have sold yourking to slaughter,
his princes and his peers toservitude,
his subjects to oppression andcontempt,
and his whole kingdom intodesolation.
Touching our person, seek we norevenge,
but we our kingdom's safety mustso tender,
whose ruin you have sought,
that to her laws we do deliveryou.
Get you therefore hence, poor,miserable wretches,
to your death,
the taste whereof
God of His mercy give youpatience to endure
and true repentance of all yourdear offences.
Bear them hence.
Now, lords, for France,
the enterprise whereof
shall be to you, as us, likeglorious.
We doubt not of a fair and luckywar,
since God so graciously hathbrought to light
this dangerous treason lurkingin our way
to hinder our beginnings.
We doubt not now but every rubis smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear countrymen.
Let us deliver our puissanceinto the hand of God,
putting it straight inexpedition.
Cheerly to sea.
The signs of war advance.
No king of England if not kingof France.
God save the king!
Honey, sweet husband,
let me bring thee to Staines.
No, for my manly heart dothyearn.
Bardolph, be blithe.
Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins.
Boy, bristle thy courage up,
for Falstaff,
he is dead,
and we must yearn therefore.
Would I were with him,wheresome'er he is,
either in heaven or in hell.
Nay, sure, he's not in hell.
He's in Arthur's bosom,
if ever man went to Arthur'sbosom.
A' made a finer end
and went away
an it had been any christomchild.
A' parted even just between12:00 and 1:00,
even at the turning of the tide,
for after I saw him
fumble with the sheets
and play with flowers
and smile upon his fingers'ends,
I knew there was but one way.
For his nose was as sharp as apen,
and a' babbled o' green fields.
"How now, Sir John?" quoth I.
"Come, man.
Be of good cheer."
So a' cried out,
"God,
God, God,"
three or four times.
Now I, to comfort him,
bid him a' should not think ofGod.
I hoped there was no need totrouble himself
with any such thoughts yet.
So a' bade me put more clotheson his feet.
And I put my hand in the bed,and I felt them,
and they were as cold as anystone.
And then I felt up to his knees,
and so upward and upward,
and all was as cold as anystone.
They say he cried out of sack.
Aye, that a' did.
And of women.
Nay, that a' did not.
That a' did, and said they weredevils incarnate.
A' could never abide carnation.
'Twas a color he never liked.
A' said once the devil wouldhave him about women.
A' did in some sorts handlewomen,
but then he was rheumatic
and talked of the whore ofBabylon.
Do you not remember?
A' saw a flea stick uponBardolph's nose
and said it was a black soulburning in hell?
Well, the fuel is gone thatmaintained that fire.
That's all the riches I got inhis service.
Shall we shog?
Yeah, the king will be gone fromSouthampton.
Come, let's away.
My love,
give me thy lips.
Look to my chattels and mymovables.
Go, clear thy crystals.
Yokefellows in arms, let us toFrance,
like horseleeches, my boys,
to suck,
the very blood to suck!
And that's but unwholesome food,they say.
Touch her soft mouth, and march.
Farewell, hostess.
I cannot kiss.
That's the humor of it.
But, adieu.
Let housewifery appear.
Keep close, I thee command!
Farewell.
Farewell!
Adieu.
Thus comes the English with fullpower upon us,
and more than carefully it usconcerns
to answer royally in ourdefenses.
Therefore, the Dukes of Berriand of Bretagne,
of Brabant and Orleans
shall make forth,
and you, Prince Dauphin,
with all swift dispatch
to line and new repair our townsof war
with men of courage and withmeans defendant.
My most redoubted father,
it is most meet we arm us'gainst the foe.
For peace itself should not sodull a kingdom,
though war nor no known quarrelwere in question
but that defenses, musters,preparations
should be maintained, assembled,and collected,
as were a war in expectation.
Therefore, I say, 'tis meet weall go forth
to view the sick and feebleparts of France.
And let us do it with no show offear.
No, with no more than if weheard that England
were busied with a Whitsunmorris dance,
for, my good liege, she is soidly kinged,
her sceptre so fantasticallyborne
by a vain, giddy, shallow,humorous youth,
that fear attends her not.
Oh, peace, Prince Dauphin.
You are too much mistaken inthis king.
Question Your Grace the lateambassadors
with what great state he heardtheir embassy,
how well supplied with noblecounselors,
how modest in exception,
and withal how terrible inconstant resolution,
and you shall find his vanitiesforspent
were but the outside of theRoman Brutus,
covering discretion with a coatof folly.
Well, 'tis not so, my Lord HighConstable,
but though we think it so, it isno matter.
Ah!
In cases of defense,
'tis best to weigh the enemymore mighty than he seems
so the proportions of defenseare filled,
which, of a weak and niggardlyprojection,
doth, like a miser, spoil hiscoat
with scanting a little cloth.
Think we King Harry strong,
and, princes, look you stronglyarm to meet him.
The kindred of him hath beenfleshed upon us,
and he is bred out of thatbloody strain
that haunted us in our familiarpaths.
Witness our too much memorableshame
when Crcy battle fatally wasstruck
and all our princes captived
by the hand of that black name,Edward, Black Prince of Wales.
This is a stem of thatvictorious stock,
and let us fear the nativemightiness
and fate of him.
Ambassadors from Harry, King ofEngland,
do crave admittance to YourMajesty.
We'll give them presentaudience.
Your Majesty!
Go, and bring them.
You see, this chase is hotlyfollowed, friends.
Turn head, and stop pursuit,
for coward dogs most spend theirmouths
when what they seem to threatenruns far before them.
Good my sovereign,
take up the English short,
and let them know
of what a monarchy you are thehead.
Self-love, my liege,
is not so vile a sin asself-neglecting.
From our brother of England?
From him,
and thus he greets Your Majesty.
He wills you, in the name of GodAlmighty,
that you divest yourself
and lay apart the borrowedglories
that by gift of heaven,
by law of nature and of nations
'longs to him and to his heirs,
namely the crown--
and all wide-stretched honors
that pertain by custom and theordinance of times
unto the crown of France.
Or else what follows?
Bloody constraint,
for if you hide the crown evenin your hearts,
there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce tempest ishe coming,
in thunder and in earthquake--
like a Jove that, if requiringfail,
he will compel--
and bids you, in the bowels ofthe Lord,
deliver up the crown
and to take mercy on the poorsouls
for whom this hungry war openshis vasty jaws--
and on your head turning thewidows' tears,
the orphans' cries, the deadmen's blood,
the privy maidens' groans
for husbands, fathers, andbetrothed lovers
that shall be swallowed in thiscontroversy.
This is his claim,
his threatening,
and my message.
Unless the dauphin be inpresence here,
to whom expressly I bringgreeting to.
For us, we will consider of thisfurther.
Your Majesty!
Tomorrow shall you bear our fullintent
back to our brother of England.
For the dauphin,
I stand here for him.
What to him from England?
Scorn and defiance,
slight regard, contempt,
and anything
that may not misbecome themighty sender
doth he prize you at.
Say...
if my father render fair return,
it is against my will,
for I desire nothing but oddswith England.
To that end, as matching to hisyouth and vanity,
I did present him with the Parisballs.
He'll make your Paris Louvreshake for it,
were it the mistress court ofmighty Europe.
And be assured, you'll find adifference,
as we his subjects have inwonder found,
between the promise of hisgreener days
and these he masters now.
Now he weighs time even to theutmost grain.
That you shall read in your ownlosses
if he stay in France.
Tomorrow shall you know our mindat full.
Dispatch us with all speed,
lest that our king come herehimself
to question our delay,
for he is footed in this landalready.
You shall be soon dispatchedwith fair conditions.
A night is but small breath andlittle pause
to answer matters of thisconsequence!
Thus with imagined wing, ourswift scene flies
in motion of no less celeritythan that of thought.
Suppose that you have seen thewell-appointed king
at Hampton pier embark hisroyalty
and his brave fleet with silkenstreamers
the young Phoebus fanning.
Play with your fancies,
and in them behold upon thehempen tackle
ship boys climbing.
Hear the shrill whistle
which doth order give to soundsconfused.
Behold the threaden sails,
borne with the invisible andcreeping wind,
draw the huge bottoms throughthe furrowed sea,
breasting the lofty surge.
Oh, do but think you stand uponthe rivage
and behold a city
on the inconstant billowsdancing,
for so appears this fleetmajestical,
holding due course to Harfleur.
Follow, follow.
Grapple your minds to sternageof this navy,
and leave your England, as deadmidnight still,
guarded with grandsires, babies,and old women,
either past or not arrived atpith and puissance,
for who is he whose chin
is but enriched with oneappearing hair,
that will not follow
these culled and choice-drawncavaliers
to France?
Work, work your thoughts,
and therein see a siege.
Behold the ordnance on theircarriages,
with fatal mouths gaping ongirded Harfleur.
Suppose the ambassador from theFrench comes back,
tells Harry that the king
doth offer him Katharine hisdaughter
and with her, to dowry,
some petty and unprofitabledukedoms.
The offer likes not,
and the nimble gunner
with linstock now the devilishcannon touches,
and down goes all before them.
Still be kind,
and eke out our performance withyour mind.
Once more unto the breach, dearfriends, once more!
Or close the wall up with ourEnglish dead!
In peace, there's nothing sobecomes a man
as modest stillness andhumility.
But when the blast of war blowsin our ears,
then imitate the action of thetiger.
Stiffen the sinews, summon upthe blood,
disguise fair nature withhard-favored rage.
Then lend the eye a terribleaspect.
Let it pry through the portageof the head
like the brass cannon!
Let the brow o'erwhelm it asfearfully
as doth a galled rock o'erhangand jutty his confounded base,
swilled with the wild andwasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth and stretchthe nostril wide,
hold hard the breath,
and bend up every spirit to hisfull height!
On, on, you noblest English,
whose blood is fet from fathersof war proof.
Fathers that, like so manyAlexanders,
have in these parts from morntill even fought
and sheathed their swords forlack of argument.
Dishonor not your mothers!
Now attest that those whom youcalled fathers
did beget you.
Be copy now to men of grosserblood,
and teach them how to war.
And you, good yeomen,
whose limbs were made inEngland,
show us here the mettle of yourpasture.
Let us swear that you are worthyour breeding,
which I doubt not,
for there is none of you so meanand base
that hath not noble luster inyour eyes.
I see you stand like greyhoundsin the slips,
straining upon the start.
The game's afoot.
Follow your spirit,
and upon this charge cry,
"God for Harry,
"England,
and Saint George!"
On!
To the breach!
Pray thee, Corporal, stay!
The knocks are too hot!
And, for mine own part, I havenot a case of lives.
The humor of it is too hot.
That's the very plainsong of it.
Plainsong is most just, forhumors do abound.
"Knocks go and come.
"God's vassals drop and die,
"and sword and shield, in bloodyfield,
doth win immortal fame!"
Would I were in an alehouse inLondon.
I would give all my fame for apot of ale and safety.
And I.
"If wishes would prevail withme,
"my purpose should not fail withme,
but thither would I hie."
"As duly, but not as truly,
as bird doth sing on bough."
Up to the breach, you dogs!
Avaunt, you cullions!
Be merciful, great Duke, to menof mold.
Abate thy rage!
Abate thy manly rage!
Bate thy rage, great duke!
Good bawcock, bate thy rage!
Use lenity, sweet chuck!
These be good humors.
Your honor wins bad humors.
Ah!
As young as I am,
I have observed these threeswashers,
and I am boy to them, all three.
but all they three,
though they would serve me,
could not be man to me,
for indeed, three such antics donot amount to a man.
For Bardolph,
he is white-livered andred-faced.
The means whereof, he faces itout but fights not.
For Pistol,
he hath a killing tongue and aquiet sword.
The means whereof,
he breaks words and keeps wholeweapons.
For Nym,
he have heard that men of fewwords
are the best men
and therefore scorns to say hisprayers
lest he should be thought acoward.
But his few bad words
are matched with as few gooddeeds.
He never broke any man's headbut his own,
and that was against a post whenhe was drunk.
They will steal anything andcall it purchase.
Bardolph stole a lute case,
bore it 12 leagues, and sold itfor 3 halfpence.
Nym and Bardolph are swornbrothers in filching,
and in Calais, they stole a fireshovel.
I knew by that piece of servicethe men would carry coals.
They would have me familiar withmen's pockets
as their gloves orhandkerchiefs,
which makes much against mymanhood
if I should take from another'spocket
to put into mine own,
for it is plain pocketing up ofwrongs.
I must leave them and seek somebetter service.
Their villainy goes much againstmy weak stomach,
and therefore, I must cast itup.
Captain Fluellen,
you must come presently to themines.
The Duke of Gloucester wouldspeak with you.
To the mines?
Tell you the duke
it is not so good to come to themines.
The mines is not according tothe disciplines of the war.
The concavities of it is notsufficient.
The adversary, you may discussunto the duke, look you now,
is digged himself 4 yard underthe countermines.
By Cheshu, I think he will blowup all
if there is not betterdirection.
The Duke of Gloucester,
to whom the order of the siegeis given,
is altogether directed by anIrishman...
a very valiant gentleman, i'faith.
It is Captain Macmorris, is itnot?
I think it be.
By Cheshu!
He is an ass as in the world!
I will verify as much in hisbeard.
He has no more directions
in the true disciplines of thewar,
the Roman disciplines,
than is a puppy dog.
Here a' comes now,
and the Scots captain, CaptainJamy, with him.
Captain Jamy is a marvelousvalorous gentleman,
that is certain,
and of great expedition andknowledge in the aunchient wars,
upon my particular knowledge ofhis directions.
By Cheshu,
he will maintain his argument
as well as any military man inthe world
in the disciplines
of the pristine wars of theRomans.
I say good day to you, CaptainFluellen.
God-den to your worship, goodCaptain James.
How now, Captain Macmorris?
Have you quit the mines?
Have the pioneers given o'er?
By Chrish, la'!
'Tish ill done!
The work is give over.
The trumpet sound the retreat.
By my hand, I swear, and myfather's soul,
the work is ill done.
'Tis give over.
I would have blowed up the town,
so Christ save me, la', in anhour.
Oh, 'tish ill done.
'Tish ill done.
By my hand, 'tish ill done.
Captain Macmorris...
I beseech you, will youvouchsafe me
a few disputations with you
as touching or concerning thedisciplines of the war,
the Roman wars,
in the way of argument andfriendly communication?
Partly to satisfy my opinion
and partly also for thesatisfaction,
look you, of my mind,
as touching the directions ofthe military discipline?
That is the point.
It shall be very good, goodfaith,
good captains bath.
and I shall quit you with goodlove,
as I may pick occasion.
And that shall I, marry.
It is no time to discourse, soChrist save me.
The day is hot--
and the weather and the wars
and the king and the dukes.
It is no time to discourse!
The town is beseeched,
and the trumpet call us to thebreach,
and we talk and, be Christ, donothing!
'Tis shame for us all, so Godsave me.
'Tis shame to stand still.
'Tis shame, by my hand.
And there is throats to be cutand works to be done.
And there is nothing done, soChrist save me, la'!
By the mess,
ere these eyes of mine takethemselves to slumber,
I'll do good service,
or I'll lig i' the ground forit.
Aye, or go to death.
But I'll pay it as valorously asI may,
that shall I surely do, that atthe brief and the long.
Marry, I'd full fain heard somequestion 'tween you tway.
Captain Macmorris,
look you, under your correction,
I do not think there is not manyof your nation.
Nation?
Of my nation?
What is my nation?
Ish a villain?
And a bastard?
And a knave?
And a rascal?
What is my nation?
Who talks of my nation?
Look you, if you take the matterotherwise than is meant,
Captain Macmorris,
peradventure I shall think youdo not use me
with that love and affability
as in discretion you ought touse me, look you,
being as good a man as yourself
both in the disciplines of thewar
and in the derivation of mybirth
and in other particularities.
I do not know you so good a manas myself.
So Christ save me,
I will cut off your head!
Gentlemen both, you will mistakeeach other!
Aye, a foul fault.
The town sounds a parley.
Captain Macmorris,
when there is more betteropportunity
to be required, look you,
I will be so bold as to tell you
I know the disciplines of thewar.
And there is an end.
How yet resolves the governor ofthe town?
This is the latest parle we willadmit.
Therefore, to our best mercygive yourselves,
or, like to men proud ofdestruction,
defy us to our worst,
for as I am a soldier,
a name that in my thoughtsbecomes me best,
if I begin the battery onceagain,
I will not leave thehalf-achieved Harfleur
till in her ashes she lieburied.
The gates of mercy shall be allshut up,
and the fleshed soldier, roughand hard of heart,
in liberty of bloody hand
shall range with conscience wideas hell,
mowing like grass
your fresh fair virgins and yourflowering infants.
What say you?
Will you yield and this avoid
or, guilty in defense, be thusdestroyed?
Our expectation hath this day anend.
The dauphin, whom of succors weentreated,
returns us that his powers arenot yet ready
to raise so great a siege.
Therefore, great King,
we yield our town and lives tothy soft mercy.
Enter our gates.
Dispose of us and ours,
for we no longer are defensible.
Open your gates.
Come, Uncle Exeter,
go you, and enter Harfleur.
There remain,
and fortify it strongly 'gainstthe French.
And use mercy to them all.
For us, dear Uncle,
the winter coming on
and sickness growing upon oursoldiers,
we will retire to Calais.
Tonight in Harfleur will we beyour guest.
Tomorrow for the march are weaddressed.
Alice, tu as ete en Angleterre,et tu parles bien le langage.
Un peu, madame.
Je te prie, m'enseignez.
Il faut que j'apprenne a parler.
Comment appelez-vous la main enanglais?
La main?
Elle est appelee de hand.
De hand.
Et les doigts?
Les doigts? Ma foi, j'oublie lesdoigts.
Mais je me souviendrai.
Les doigts?
Je pense qu'ils sont appeles defingres.
Oui, de fingres.
La main, de hand.
Les doigts, de fingres.
Je pense que je suis le bonecolier.
J'ai gagnee deux mots d'anglaisvitement.
Comment appelez-vous les ongles?
Les ongles?
Nous les appelons de nails.
De nails.
Ecoutez.
Dites-moi si je parle bien.
De hand,
de fingres,
et de nails.
C'est bien dit, madame.
Il est fort bon anglais.
Dites-moi l'anglais pour lebras.
De arm, madame.
De arm.
Et le coude?
De elbow.
Oui.
Je m'en fais la repetition detous les mots
que vous m'avez appris des apresent.
Il est trop difficile, madame,comme je pense.
Excusez-moi, Alice.
Ecoutez.
De hand,
de fingres,
de nails,
d'arma,
de bilbow.
D'elbow, madame.
Oh, Seigneur Dieu, je m'enoublie.
D'elbow.
Comment appelez-vous le col?
De nick, madame.
De nick.
Et le menton?
De chin.
De sin.
Le col, de nick.
Le menton, de sin.
Oui, sauf votre honneur, enverite,
vous prononcez les mots
aussi droit que les natifs
d'Angleterre.
Je ne doute point d'apprendre,
par la grace de Dieu, et en peude temps.
N'avez-vous pas deja oublie ceque je vous ai enseigne?
Non, je reciterai a vouspromptement.
De hand,
de fingres,
de mails--
De nails, madame.
De nails,
d'arm,
de ilbow.
Sauf votre honneur, de elbow.
Ainsi dis-je.
De elbow,
de nick,
de sin.
Comment appelez-vous le pied etla robe?
Le foot et le coun.
Mm-hmm.
Oh, Seigneur Dieu.
Ce sont mots de son mauvais,corruptible, gros, et impudique,
et non pour les dames d'honneurd'user.
Je ne voudrais prononcer cesmots devant
les seigneurs de France pourtout le monde.
Foh.
Le foot et le coun.
Neanmoins, je reciterai
une autre fois ma leconensemble.
De hand,
de fingres,
de nails,
d'arm,
de elbow...
de nick,
de sin,
de foot,
et le coun.
Excellent, madame.
C'est assez pour une fois.
Allons-nous a diner.
'Tis certain he has passed theriver Somme!
And if he be not fought withal,my lord,
let us not live in France.
Let us quit all
and give our vineyards to abarbarous people.
Oh, Dieu vivant.
Shall a few sprays of us,
the emptying of our fathers'luxury,
our scions put in wild andsavage stock,
spurt up so suddenly into theclouds
and overlook their grafters?
Normans, but bastard Normans!
Norman bastards!
Mort de ma vie!
If they march along unfoughtwithal,
but I will sell my dukedom
to buy a slobbery and a dirtyfarm
in that nook-shotten isle ofAlbion!
By faith and honor,
our madams mock at us
and plainly say our mettle isbred out,
and they will give their bodiesto the lust of English youth
to new-store France with bastardwarriors.
Where is Montjoy the herald?
Speed him hence!
Let him greet England with oursharp defiance.
Up, princes,
and with spirit of honor
edged more sharper than yourswords,
hie to the field.
Bar Harry England that sweepsthrough our land
with pennons painted in theblood of Harfleur.
Go down upon him-- you havepower enough--
and in a captive chariot intoRouen,
bring him our prisoner.
This becomes the great.
Ha!
Sorry am I his numbers are sofew,
his soldiers sick and famishedin their march,
for I am sure, when he shall seeour army,
he'll drop his heart into thesink of fear
and for achievement offer us hisransom.
Therefore, Lord Constable, hasteon Montjoy,
and let him say to England thatwe send to know
what willing ransom he willgive.
Prince Dauphin, you shall staywith us in Rouen.
Not so, I do beseech YourMajesty.
Be patient, for you shall remainwith us.
Now forth, Lord Constable andprinces all,
and quickly bring us word ofEngland's fall.
Aye!
How now, Captain Fluellen.
Come you from the bridge?
I assure you,
there is very excellent servicescommitted at the bridge.
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?
The Duke of Exeter is asmagnanimous as Agamemnon
and a man that I love and honorwith my soul and my heart
and my duty and my life and myliving
and my uttermost power.
He is not-- God be praised andblessed--
any hurt in the world
but keeps the bridge mostvaliantly,
with excellent discipline.
There is an aunchient lieutenantthere at the bridge.
I think in my very consciencenow
he's as valiant a man as MarkAntony,
and he is a man of no estimationin the world,
but I did see him do as gallantservice.
What do you call him?
He is called Aunchient Pistol.
I know him not.
Captain!
Here is the man.
I thee beseech to do me favors.
The Duke of Exeter doth lovethee well.
Aye, I praise God.
I have merited some love at hishands.
Bardolph, a soldier,
firm and sound of heart and ofbuxom valor,
hath by cruel fate
and giddy Fortune's furiousfickle wheel,
that goddess blind
that stands upon the rollingrestless stone--
By your patience, AunchientPistol.
Fortune is painted blind with amuffler afore her eyes
to signify to you that Fortuneis blind.
She is painted also with a wheel
to signify to you, which is themoral of it,
that she is turning andinconstant and mutability
and variation.
And her foot, look you, is fixedupon a spherical stone
which rolls and rolls and rolls.
In good truth, the poet makes
a most excellent description ofit.
Fortune is an excellent moral.
Fortune is Bardolph's foe andfrowns on him,
for he hath stolen a pax andhanged must be,
a damned death.
Let gallows gape for dog,
let man go free,
and let not hemp his windpipesuffocate,
for Exeter hath given the doomof death
for pax of little price.
Therefore, go speak.
The duke will hear thy voice.
And let not Bardolph's vitalthread be cut
with edge of penny cord and vilereproach.
Speak, Captain, for his life,and I will thee requite.
Aunchient Pistol, I do partlyunderstand your meaning.
Why, then, rejoice therefore.
Certainly, Aunchient, it is nota thing to rejoice at,
for, look you, if he were mybrother,
I would desire the duke to usehis good pleasure
and to put him to execution,
for discipline ought to be used!
Die, and be damned.
And figo for thy friendship!
Why, this is an arrantcounterfeit rascal.
I remember him now--
a bawd, a cutpurse!
I tell you what, Captain Gower.
I do perceive he is not the man
he would gladly make show to theworld he is.
If I find a hole in his coat,
I will tell him my mind.
Hark you, the king is coming,
and I must speak with him fromthe bridge.
God bless Your Majesty.
How now, Fluellen.
Camest thou from the bridge?
Aye, so please Your Majesty.
The Duke of Exeter hath verygallantly
maintained the bridge.
The French is gone off, lookyou.
And there is gallant and mostbrave passages.
Marry, th' adversary
was have possession of thebridge.
But he is enforced to retire,
and the Duke of Exeter is masterof the bridge.
I can tell Your Majesty, theduke is a very brave man.
What men have you lost,Fluellen?
The perdition of the adversaryhath been very great--
well, reasonable great.
For my part, I think the dukehath lost never a man
but one that is like to beexecuted
for robbing a church,
one Bardolph,
if Your Majesty know the man.
His face is all bubukles
and whelks and knobs and flamesof fire,
and his lips blows at his nose.
It is like a coal of fire,
sometimes blue, sometimes red,
but his nose is executed,
and his fire is out.
We would have all such offendersso cut off.
And we give express charge
that in our marches through thecountry,
there be nothing compelled fromthe villages,
nothing taken but paid for,
none of the French
upbraided or abused indisdainful language.
When lenity and cruelty play fora kingdom,
the gentler gamester is thesoonest winner.
You know me by my habit.
Well, then, I know thee.
What shall I know of thee?
My master's mind.
Unfold it.
Thus says my king.
"Say thou to Harry of England
"though we seemed dead, we didbut sleep.
"Advantage is a better soldierthan rashness.
"Tell him we could have rebukedhim at Harfleur,
"but that we thought not good
"to bruise an injury till itwere full ripe.
"Now we speak upon our cue, andour voice is imperial.
"England shall repent his folly,
"see his weakness, and admireour sufferance.
"Bid him therefore consider ofhis ransom,
"which must proportion thelosses we have borne,
"the subjects we have lost, thedisgrace we have digested,
"which in weight to re-answer,
"his pettiness would bow under.
"To this add defiance,
"and tell him, for conclusion,
"he hath betrayed his followers,
whose condemnation ispronounced."
So far my king and master,
so much my office.
What is thy name?
I know thy quality.
Montjoy.
Thou dost thy office fairly.
Turn thee back,
and tell thy king I do not seekhim now
but could be willing to march onto Calais
without impeachment,
for, to say the sooth,
though it is no wisdom toconfess so much
unto an enemy of craft andvantage,
my people are with sickness muchenfeebled,
my numbers lessened,
and those few I have
almost no better than so manyFrench,
who when they were in health, Itell thee, herald,
I thought upon one pair ofEnglish legs
did march three Frenchmen.
Yet, forgive me, God, that I dobrag thus.
This your air of France hathblown that vice in me.
I must repent.
Go therefore tell thy master,
here I am.
My ransom is this frail andworthless trunk,
my army but a weak and sicklyguard.
Yet, God before, tell him wewill come on,
though France himself and suchanother neighbor
stand in our way.
There's for thy labor, Montjoy.
Go, bid thy master well advisehimself.
If we may pass, we will.
If we be hindered, we shall yourtawny ground
with your red blood discolor.
So, Montjoy, fare you well.
The sum of all our answer is butthis.
We would not seek a battle as weare,
nor as we are, we say we willnot shun it.
So tell your master.
I shall deliver so.
Thanks to Your Highness.
I hope they will not come uponus now.
We are in God's hand, brother,not in theirs.
March to the bridge.
It now draws toward night.
Beyond the river, we'll encampourselves,
and on tomorrow bid them marchaway.
Tut; I have the best armor inthe world.
Would it were day.
You have an excellent armor,
but let my horse have his due.
It is the best horse of Europe.
Will it never be morning?
My Lord of Orleans
and my Lord High Constable,
you talk of horse and armor?
You are as well-provided of bothas any prince in the world.
What a long night is this.
I will not change my horse
with any that treads but on fourpasterns.
Ca,
ha.
He bounds from the earth as ifhis entrails were hairs.
Le cheval volant, the Pegasus,chez les narines de feu.
When I bestride him, I soar,
I am a hawk.
He trots the air.
The earth sings when he touchesit.
The basest horn of his hoof ismore musical
than the pipe of Hermes.
He's of the color of the nutmeg.
And of the heat of the ginger.
It is a beast for Perseus.
He is pure air and fire.
And the dull elements of earthand water
never appear in him,
but only in patient stillnesswhen his rider mounts him.
He is indeed a horse,
and all other jades you may callbeasts.
Indeed, my lord,
it is a most absolute andexcellent horse.
It is the prince of palfreys.
His neigh is like the bidding ofa monarch,
and his countenance enforceshomage.
No more, Cousin.
Nay, the man hath no wit thatcannot,
from the rising of the lark tothe lodging of the lamb,
vary deserved praise on mypalfrey.
It is a theme as fluent as thesea.
Turn the sands into eloquenttongues,
and my horse is an argument forthem all.
It is a subject for a sovereignto reason on
and for a sovereign's sovereignto ride on
and for the world, familiar tous and unknown,
to lay apart their particularfunction
and wonder at him.
I once writ a sonnet in hispraise and began thus.
"Wonder of nature"--
I have heard a sonnet begin soto one's mistress.
Then did they imitate that whichI composed to my courser,
for my horse is my mistress.
My Lord Constable,
the armor I saw in your tenttonight,
are those stars or suns upon it?
Stars, my lord.
Some of them will fall tomorrow,I hope.
Yet my sky shall not want.
That may be,
for you bear a manysuperfluously,
and 'twere more honor some wereaway.
Even as your horse bears yourpraises,
who would trot as well
were some of your bragsdismounted.
Would I were able to load himwith his desert.
Will it never be day?
I will trot tomorrow a mile,
and my way shall be paved withEnglish faces.
I will not say so,
for fear I should be faced outof my way.
Yet I would it were morning.
I would fain be about the earsof the English.
Who will go to hazard with mefor 20 prisoners?
You must first go yourself tohazard, ere you have them.
'Tis midnight.
I'll go arm myself.
The dauphin longs for morning.
He longs to eat the English.
I think he will eat all hekills.
By the white hand of my lady,he's a gallant prince.
Swear by her foot that she maytread out the oath.
He is simply
the most active gentleman ofFrance.
Doing is activity,
and he will still be doing.
He never did harm that I heardof.
Nor will do none tomorrow.
He will keep that good namestill.
I know him to be valiant.
I was told that by one who knowshim better than you.
What's he?
Marry, he told me so himself,
and he said he cared not whoknew it.
My Lord High Constable...
the English lie within 1,500paces of your tents.
Who hath measured the ground?
The Lord Grandpre.
A most expert and valiantgentleman.
Would it were day!
Alas, poor Harry of England,
he longs not for the dawning aswe do.
What a wretched and peevishfellow
is this King of England
to mope with his fat-brainedfollowers
so far out of his knowledge.
If the English had anyapprehension,
they would run away.
That they lack, for if theirheads
had any intellectual armor,
they could never wear such heavyhead-pieces.
That island of England breedsvery valiant creatures.
Their mastiffs are ofunmatchable courage.
Then shall we find tomorrow
they have only stomachs to eatand none to fight.
Now is it time to arm.
Come, shall we about it?
It is now 2:00,
but, let me see, by 10:00,
we shall have each a hundredEnglishmen.
Now entertain conjecture of atime
when creeping murmur and theporing dark
fills the wide vessel of theuniverse.
From camp to camp through thefoul womb of night,
the hum of either army stillysounds
that the fixed sentinels almostreceive
the secret whispers of eachother's watch.
Fire answers fire,
and through their paly flames,
each battle sees the other'sumbered face.
Steed threatens steed in highand boastful neighs,
piercing the night's dull ear.
And from the tents, thearmorers,
accomplishing the knights,
with busy hammers closing rivetsup,
give dreadful note ofpreparation.
The country cocks do crow,
the clocks do toll,
and the third hour of drowsymorning name.
Proud of their numbers andsecure in soul,
the confident and over-lustyFrench
do the low-rated English play atdice
and chide the crippletardy-gaited Night,
who, like a foul and ugly witch,doth limp so tediously away.
The poor condemned English, likesacrifices,
by their watchful fires sitpatiently
and inly ruminate the morning'sdanger
and their gesture sad,
investing lank-lean cheeks andwarworn coats,
presenteth them unto the gazingmoon
so many horrid ghosts.
Oh, now, who will behold
the royal captain of this ruinedband
walking from watch to watch,from tent to tent,
let him cry, "Praise and gloryon his head,"
for forth he goes and visits allhis host,
bids them good morrow with amodest smile
and calls them brothers,friends, and countrymen.
Upon his royal face, there is nonote
how dread an army hath enroundedhim,
nor doth he dedicate one jot ofcolor
unto the weary and all-watchednight,
but freshly looks and overbearsattaint
with cheerful semblance andsweet majesty
that every wretch, pining andpale before,
beholding him plucks comfortfrom his looks.
A largess universal, like thesun,
his liberal eye doth give toevery one,
thawing cold fear
that mean and gentle all behold,
as may unworthiness define,
a little touch of Harry in thenight.
And so our scene must to thebattle fly,
where--oh, for pity--
we shall much disgrace
with four or five most vile andragged foils,
right ill-disposed in brawlridiculous,
the name of Agincourt.
Yet sit and see,
minding true things by whattheir mockeries be.
Good morrow, Brother Bedford.
God Almighty,
there is some soul of goodnessin things evil,
would men observingly distill itout,
for our bad neighbor makes usearly stirrers,
which is both healthful and goodhusbandry.
Besides, they are our outwardconsciences
and preachers to us all,
admonishing that we should dressus fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey fromthe weed
and make a moral of the devilhimself.
Good morrow, old Sir ThomasErpingham.
A good soft pillow for that goodwhite head
were better than a churlish turfof France.
Not so, my liege.
This lodging likes me better,
since I may say, "Now lie I likea king."
'Tis good for men
to love their present pains uponexample,
so the spirit is eased.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas.
Brothers both, commend me to theprinces in our camp.
Do my good morrow to them,
and anon desire them all to mypavilion.
We shall, my liege.
Shall I attend Your Grace?
No, my good knight.
Go with my brothers to my lordsof England.
I and my bosom must debate awhile,
and then I would no othercompany.
The Lord in heaven bless thee,noble Harry.
God-a-mercy, old heart.
Thou speakest cheerfully.
Qui va la?
A friend.
Discuss unto me, art thouofficer?
Or art thou base, common, andpopular?
I am a gentleman of a company.
Trailest thou the puissant pike?
Even so.
What are you?
As good a gentleman as theemperor.
Then you are a better than theking.
Ah, the king's a bawcock with aheart of gold,
a lad of life, an imp of fame,
of parents good, of fist mostvaliant.
I kiss his dirty shoe, and fromheartstring,
I love the lovely bully.
What is thy name?
Harry le Roy.
Le Roy!
A Cornish name.
Art thou of Cornish crew?
No, I am a Welshman.
Knowest thou Fluellen?
Yes.
Tell him I'll knock his leekabout his pate
upon Saint Davy's day.
Do not you wear your dagger inyour cap that day,
lest he knock that about yours.
Are you his friend?
And his kinsman too.
A figo for thee, then!
Ouch!
I thank you.
God be with you.
My name is Pistol called.
It sorts well with yourfierceness.
Captain Fluellen.
Shh!
In the name of Jesu Christ,speak fewer.
It is the greatest admiration inthe universal world
when the true and aunchient
prerogatives and the laws of thewars
is not kept.
If you would take
the pains but to examine thewars of Pompey the Great,
I warrant you shall find
there is no tiddle-taddle norpibble-pabble
in Pompey's camp.
I warrant you,
you shall find the ceremonies ofthe wars
and the cares of it and theforms of it
and the sobriety of it and themodesty of it
to be otherwise.
Why, the enemy is very loud.
You hear him all night.
If the enemy is an ass and afool
and a prating coxcomb,
is it meet, think you,
that we should also be, lookyou,
an ass and a fool and a pratingcoxcomb?
Shh!
In your own conscience, now?
I will speak lower.
I pray you and beseech you thatyou will.
Though it appear a little out offashion,
there is much care and valor inthis Welshman.
Brother John Bates,
is not that the morning whichbreaks yonder?
I think it be.
But we have no great cause todesire the approach of it.
Ah, we see yonder the beginningof the day.
I do not think we'll ever seethe end of it.
Who goes there?
A friend.
Under what captain serve you?
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.
A good old commander, a mostkind gentleman.
I pray you,
what thinks he of our estate?
Even as men wrecked upon a sand,
that look to be washed off thenext tide.
He hath not told his thought tothe king.
No, nor it is not meet heshould,
for though I speak it to you,
I think the king is but a man asI am.
The violet smells to him as itdoth to me.
The element shows to him as itdoth to me.
All his senses have but humanconditions.
His ceremonies laid by,
in his nakedness, he appears buta man.
And though his affections arehigher mounted than ours,
yet, when they stoop,
they stoop with the like wing.
Therefore, when he sees reasonof fears as we do,
his fears, out of doubt,
be of the same relish as oursare.
Yet, in reason, no man shouldpossess him
with any appearance of fear,
lest he, by showing it, shoulddishearten his army.
He may show what outward couragehe may,
but I believe, as cold a nightas 'tis,
he could wish himself in theThames up to the neck.
And I would he were and I by himat all adventures,
so we were quit here.
By my troth, I will speak myconscience of the king.
I think he would not wishhimself anywhere
but where he is.
Then I would he were here alone.
So he's sure to be ransomed andmany poor men's lives saved.
I dare say you love him not soill
to wish him here alone,
howsoever you speak this to feelother men's minds.
Methinks I could not dieanywhere so contented
as in the king's company,
his cause being just, hisquarrel honorable.
That's more than we know.
Aye, or more than we should seekafter,
for we know enough if we know weare the king's subjects.
If his cause be wrong,
our obedience to the king wipesthe crime of it out of us.
But if the cause be not good,
the king himself hath a heavyreckoning to make,
when all those legs and arms andheads,
chopped off in a battle,
shall join together at thelatter day and cry all,
"We died at--at such a place"--
some swearing,
some crying for a surgeon,
some upon their wives left poorbehind them,
some upon the debts they owe,
some upon their children
rawly left.
I am afeard there are few diewell
that die in a battle,
for how can they charitablydispose of anything
when blood is their argument?
Now if these men do not diewell,
it will be a black matter
for the king that led them toit,
who to disobey were against allproportion
of subjection.
So if a son that is by hisfather
sent about merchandise
do sinfully miscarry upon thesea,
the imputation of hiswickedness, by your rule,
should be imposed upon hisfather that sent him.
Or if a servant under hismaster's command
transporting a sum of money
be assailed by robbers and diein many irreconciled iniquities,
you may call the business of themaster
the author of the servant'sdamnation.
But this is not so.
The king is not bound to answer
the particular endings of hissoldiers,
the father of his son, nor themaster of his servant,
for they purpose not their death
when they purpose theirservices.
Besides, there is no king, behis cause never so spotless,
if it come to the arbitrament ofswords,
can try it out with allunspotted soldiers.
Some peradventure have on them
the guilt of premeditated andcontrived murder;
some of beguiling virgins
with the broken seals ofperjury;
some making the wars theirbulwark
that have before gored thegentle bosom of peace
with pillage and robbery.
Now, if these men have defeatedthe law
and outrun native punishment,
though they can outstrip men,
they have no wings to fly fromGod.
War is his beadle, war is hisvengeance
so that here men are punished
for before-breach of the king'slaws
in now the king's quarrel.
Where they feared the death,they have borne life away,
Where they would be safe, theyperish.
Then if they die unprovided,
no more is the king guilty oftheir damnation
than he was before guilty ofthose impieties
for the which they are nowvisited.
Every subject's duty is theking's,
but every subject's soul is hisown.
Therefore should every soldierin the wars
do as every sick man in his bed,
wash every mote out of hisconscience;
and dying so, death is to himadvantage;
or not dying, the time wasblessedly lost
wherein such preparation wasgained.
And in him that escapes,
it were not sin to think that,making God so free an offer,
He let him outlive that day tosee His greatness
and to teach others how theyshould prepare.
'Tis certain, every man thatdies ill,
the ill upon his own head,
the king is not to answer forit.
I do not desire he should answerfor me,
and yet I determine to fightlustily for him.
I myself heard the king say hewould not be ransomed.
Aye, he said so, to make usfight cheerfully,
but when our throats are cut,
he may be ransomed and we ne'erthe wiser.
If I live to see it,
I'll never trust his word after.
Oh, you pay him, then.
Oh, that's a perilous shot outof an elder-gun
that a poor and a privatedispleasure
can do against a monarch.
You may as well go about to turnthe sun to ice
with fanning in its face with apeacock's feather.
You'll never trust his wordafter.
Come, it is a foolish saying.
Your reproof is something tooround.
I should be angry with you, ifthe time were convenient.
Well, let it be a quarrelbetween us if you live.
I embrace it.
How shall I know thee again?
Give me any gage of thine, and Iwill wear it in my bonnet.
If ever thou darest acknowledgeit,
I will make it my quarrel.
There is my glove.
Give me another of thine.
There.
This will I also wear in my cap,
and if ever you come to me andsay, after tomorrow,
"This is my glove,"
by this hand, I'll take thee abox on the ear.
If ever I live to see it, I willchallenge it.
Thou darest as well be hanged.
Well, I will do it,
though I take thee in the king'scompany!
Keep thy word!
Fare thee well.
Be friends, you English fools,be friends.
We have French quarrels enough,if you could tell how to reckon.
Indeed, the French may lay 20French crowns to 1
they will beat us,
for they bear them on theirshoulders.
But it is no English treason tocut French crowns.
And tomorrow the king himselfwill be a clipper!
Upon the king.
Let us our lives,
our souls,
our debts,
our careful wives,
our children,
and our sins
lay on the king.
We must bear all.
Oh, hard condition,
twin-born with greatness,
subject to the breath of everyfool
whose sense no more can feel buthis own wringing.
What infinite heart's ease mustkings neglect
that private men enjoy?
And what have kings thatprivates have not too
save ceremony,
save general ceremony?
And what art thou,
thou idle ceremony?
What kind of god art thou
that sufferest more of mortalgriefs
than do thy worshippers?
What are thy rents?
What are thy comings in?
Oh, ceremony, show me but thyworth.
What is thy soul of adoration?
Art thou aught else
but place, degree, and form
creating awe and fear in othermen?
Wherein thou art less happy,being feared,
than they in fearing?
What drinkest thou oft, insteadof homage sweet,
but poisoned flattery?
Oh, be sick, great greatness.
Bid thy ceremony give thee cure.
Thinkest thou the fiery feverwill go out
with titles blown fromadulation?
Will it...
give place to flexure and lowbending?
Canst thou, when thou commandestthe beggar's knee,
command the health of it?
No, thou proud dream
that playest so subtly with aking's repose.
I am a king that find thee.
And I know 'tis not the balm,thesceptre, and the ball;
the sword, the mace, the crownimperial;
the intertissued robe of goldand pearl;
the farced title running 'forethe king;
the throne he sits on;
nor the tide of pomp
that beats upon the high shoreof this world--
no, not all these,
thrice-gorgeous ceremony.
Not all these, laid in bedmajestical,
can sleep so soundly as thewretched slave,
who with a body filled andvacant mind
gets him to rest, crammed withdistressful bread,
never sees horrid night,
the child of hell,
but, like a lackey, from therise to set
sweats in the eye of Phoebus andall night sleeps in Elysium.
Next day after dawn
doth rise and help Hyperion tohis horse
and follows so the ever-runningyear,
with profitable labor, to hisgrave.
And but for ceremony,
such a wretch,
winding up days with toil andnights with sleep,
had the forehand and vantage ofa king.
The slave, a member of thecountry's peace,
enjoys it,
but in gross brain little wotswhat watch the king keeps
to maintain the peace,
whose hours the peasant bestadvantages.
My lord.
My lord, your nobles, jealous ofyour absence,
seek through your camp to findyou.
Good old knight,
collect them all together at mytent.
I'll be before thee.
I shall do it, my lord.
Oh, God of battles,
steel my soldiers' hearts.
Possess them not with fear.
Take from them now the sense ofreckoning,
if the opposed numbers plucktheir hearts from them.
Not today, oh, Lord,
oh, not today.
Think not upon the fault
my father made in compassing thecrown.
I Richard's body have interredanew
and on it have bestowed morecontrite tears
than from it issued forced dropsof blood.
500 poor I have in yearly pay,
who twice a day their witheredhands
hold up toward heaven to pardonblood.
And I have built two chantries,
where the sad and solemn priestssing still for Richard's soul.
More would I do,
but all that I can do is nothingworth,
since that my penitence comesafter all,
imploring pardon.
My liege.
My brother Gloucester's voice.
Aye.
I know thy errand.
I will go with thee.
The day,
my friends,
and all things stay for me.
The sun doth gild our armor.
Up, my lords.
Montez a cheval!
My horse, varlet!
Laquais! Ha!
Oh, brave spirit.
Via.
Les eaux et la terre.
Rien puis.
L'air et le feu.
Ciel, Cousin Orleans.
Now, my Lord Constable.
Hark, how our steeds for presentservice neigh.
Mount them and make incision intheir hides
that their hot blood may spin inEnglish eyes
and dout them with superfluouscourage, ha.
What, will you have them weepour horses' blood?
How shall we, then, behold theirnatural tears?
The English are embattled, youFrench peers.
To horse, you gallant princes,straight to horse.
Do but behold yon poor andstarved band,
and your fair show shall suckaway their souls,
leaving them but the shales andhusks of men.
There is not work enough for allour hands,
scarce blood enough in all theirsickly veins
to give each naked curtal ax astain,
that our French gallants shalltoday draw out
and sheathe for lack of sport.
If we but blow on them,
the vapor of our valor willo'erturn them.
Why do you stay so long, mylords of France?
Yon island carrions, desperateof their bones,
ill-favoredly become the morningfield.
Their ragged curtains poorly arelet loose,
and our air shakes them passingscornfully.
The horsemen sit like fixedcandlesticks
with torch-staves in their hand.
And their poor jades lob downtheir heads,
dropping the hides and hips,
the gum down-roping from theirpale-dead eyes,
and in their pale dull mouths,
the gimmal bit lies foul withchewed grass,
dull and motionless.
And their executors, the knavishcrows,
fly o'er them, all impatient fortheir hour.
They have said their prayers,and they stay for death.
Shall we go send them dinnersand fresh suits
and give their fasting horsesprovender,
and after fight with them?
I stay but for my guidon.
Let's away.
The sun is high,
and we outwear the day.
Where is the king?
The king himself
is rode to view their battle.
Of fighting men, they have fullthree-score thousand.
There's five to one.
Besides, they all are fresh.
God's arm strike with us; 'tis afearful odds.
God by you, princes all.
I'll to my charge.
If we no more meet till we meetin heaven,
then, joyfully, my noble Lord ofBedford,
my dear Lord Gloucester,
my good Lord Exeter,
and my kind kinsman,
warriors all, adieu.
Farewell, good Salisbury,
and good luck go with thee.
Farewell, kind lord.
Fight valiantly today.
Yet I do thee wrong to mind theeof it,
for thou art framed of the firmtruth of valor.
He is as full of valor as ofkindness,
princely in both.
Oh, that we now had here
but one 10,000 of those men inEngland
that do no work today.
What's he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmoreland.
No, my fair cousin.
We are marked to die,
we are enow to do our countryloss;
and if to live, the fewer men,the greater share of honor.
God's will.
I pray thee, wish not one manmore.
By Jove, I am not covetous forgold
nor care I who doth feed upon mycost.
It yearns me not if men mygarments wear.
Such outward things dwell not inmy desires.
But if it be a sin to covethonor,
I am the most offending soulalive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not aman from England.
God's peace.
I would not lose so great anhonor
as one man more, methinks, wouldshare from me
for the best hope I have.
Oh, do not wish one more.
Rather proclaim it,Westmoreland, through my host,
that he which hath no stomach tothis fight, let him depart.
His passport shall be made
and crowns for convoy put intohis purse.
We would not die in that man'scompany
that fears his fellowship to diewith us.
This day is called
the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day
and comes safe home
will stand at tiptoe when thisday is named
and rouse him at the name ofCrispian.
He that shall live this day
and see old age
will yearly on the vigil feasthis neighbors
and say, "Tomorrow is SaintCrispian."
Then shall he strip his sleeveand show his scars
and say, "These wounds I had onCrispian's day."
Old men forget,
yet all shall be forgot,
but he'll remember withadvantages
what feats he did that day.
Then shall our names,
familiar in his mouth ashousehold words--
Harry the king,
Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot,
Salisbury and Gloucester--
be in their flowing cups freshlyremembered.
This story shall the good manteach his son.
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'ergo by,
from this day to the ending ofthe world,
but we in it shall beremembered,
we few,
we happy few,
we band of brothers;
for he today that sheds hisblood with me
shall be my brother.
Be he ne'er so vile,
this day shall gentle hiscondition.
And gentlemen in England nowabed
shall think themselves accursedthey were not here
and hold their manhoods cheap
whiles any speaks that foughtwith us
upon Saint Crispin's day.
My sovereign lord,
bestow yourself with speed.
The French are bravely in theirbattles set
and will with all expediencecharge on us.
All things are ready if ourminds be so.
Perish the man whose mind isbackward now.
Thou dost not wish more helpfrom England, coz.
God's will, my liege, would youand I alone,
without more help, could fightthis royal battle.
Why, now thou hast unwished5,000 men,
which likes me better than towish us one.
You know your places.
God be with you all.
Once more, I come to know ofthee,
King Harry,
if for thy ransom thou wilt nowcompound,
before thy most assuredoverthrow,
for certainly thou art so nearthe gulf,
thou needs must be englutted.
Besides, in mercy, the constabledesires thee
thou wilt mind thy followers ofrepentance
that their souls may make apeaceful and a sweet retire
from off these fields, where,wretches,
their poor bodies must lie andfester.
Who hath sent thee now?
The constable of France.
I pray thee, bear my formeranswer back.
Bid them achieve me and thensell my bones.
Good God, why should they mockpoor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell thelion's skin
while the beast lived
was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies
shall no doubt find nativegraves,
upon the which, I trust,
shall witness live in brass ofthis day's work.
Those that leave their valiantbones in France,
dying like men, though buried inyour dunghills,
they shall be famed,
for there, the sun shall greetthem
and draw their honors reeking upto heaven,
leaving their earthly parts tochoke your clime,
the smell whereof shall breed aplague in France.
Let me speak proudly.
Tell the constable
we are but warriors for theworking day.
Our gayness and our gilt are allbesmirched
with rainy marching in thepainful field.
There's not a piece of featherin our host--
good argument, I hope, we willnot fly--
and time hath worn us intoslovenry.
But, by the mass, our hearts arein the trim.
And my poor soldiers tell me,
yet ere night, they'll be infresher robes,
or they will pluck the gay newcoats
o'er the French soldiers' heads
and turn them out of service.
If they do this-- as, if Godplease, they shall--
my ransom then shall soon belevied.
Herald, save thou thy labor.
Come thou no more for ransom,gentle herald,
for they shall have none, Iswear, but these my joints,
which if they have as I willleave 'em them,
shall yield them little, tellthe constable.
I shall, King Harry.
And so fare thee well.
Thou never shalt hear heraldanymore.
I fear thou wilt once more comeagain for a ransom.
My lord, most humbly on my knee,
I beg the leading of the vaward.
Take it,
brave York.
Now, soldiers,
march away!
And how thou pleasest, God,dispose the day.
Yield, cur!
Je pense que vous etes legentilhomme de bonne qualite.
Art thou a gentleman?
What is thy name? Discuss.
Oh, Seigneur Dieu.
Oh, Signieur Dew should be agentleman.
Perpend my words, Oh, SignieurDew, and mark.
Oh, Signieur Dew, thou diest onpoint of fox,
except, oh, Signieur,
you do give to me egregiousransom.
Oh, prenez misericorde.
Ayez pitie de moi.
Est-il impossible d'echapper laforce de ton bras.
Brass, cur?
You damned and luxuriousmountain goat,
offerest thou me brass?
Oh, pardonnez-moi.
What sayest thou so to me?
A ton of moys?
Come hither, boy!
Ask me this slave in French whatis his name.
Ecoutez?
Comment etes-vous appele?
Monsieur le Fer.
He says his name is Master Fer.
Master Fer?
I'll fer him, firk him, andferret him.
Discuss the same in French untohim.
I do not know the French for ferand ferret and firk.
Well, bid him prepare, for Iwill cut his throat.
Que dit-il, Monsieur?
Il me commande a vous dire quevous faites vous pret.
Car ce soldat ici est disposetout a cette heure
de couper votre gorge.
Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy,
peasant, unless you give mecrowns,
brave crowns,
or mangled shalt thou be bythis, my sword.
Oh, je vous supplie, pourl'amour de Dieu,
me pardonner!
Je suis gentilhomme de bonnemaison.
Gardez ma vie, et je vousdonnerai deux cents ecus.
What are his words?
He prays for you to save hislife.
He is a gentleman of good house.
And for his ransom, he will giveyou 200 crowns.
Oui, monsieur.
Tell him my fury will abate,
but I the crowns will take.
Petit monsieur, que dit-il?
Encore qu'il est contre sonjurement
de pardonner aucun prisonnier.
Neanmoins, pour les ecus quevous l'avez promis,
il est content de vous donner laliberte, le franchisement.
Sur mes genoux je vous donnemille remercimens.
Et je m'estime heureux que jesuis tombe entre
les mains d'un chevalier,
je pense, le plus brave,vaillant,
et tres distingue seigneurd'Angleterre!
Merci, monsieur.
Expound unto me, boy.
He gives you, upon his knees, athousand thanks.
And he esteems himself happythat he hath fallen
into the hands of one, as hethinks,
the most brave, valorous,
and thrice-worthy signieur ofEngland.
As I suck blood, I will somemercy show.
Follow me!
Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
I did never know so full a voiceissue from so empty a heart.
But the saying is true,
"The empty vessel makes thegreatest sound."
Bardolph and Nym had ten timesmore valor
than this roaring devil i' theold play,
and they are both hanged.
And so would this be
if he durst steal anythingadventurously.
I must stay with the lackey withthe luggage of our camp.
The French might have a goodprey of us,
if he knew of it,
for there is none to guard itbut boys.
Shame and eternal shame, nothingbut shame!
Oh, let us die in honor.
Once more back again!
And he who will not followBourbon now, let him go hence,
and with his cap in hand, like abase pander,
hold the chamber door whilst bya slave,
no gentler than my dog,
his fairest daughter iscontaminated.
Disorder, that hath spoiled us,friend us now.
Let us on heaps go offer up ourlives.
We are enow yet living in thefield
to smother up the English in ourthrongs
if any order might be thoughtupon.
Oh, the devil take order now.
I'll to the throng!
Let life be short, else shamewill be too long.
Well have we done,thrice-valiant countrymen.
But all's not done.
Yet keep the French the field.
The Duke of York commends him toYour Majesty.
Lives he, good Uncle?
Thrice within this hour, I sawhim down,
thrice up again and fighting.
From helmet to the spur, allblood he was.
In which array, brave soldier,doth he lie, larding the plain.
And by his bloody side,
yokefellow to his honor-owingwounds,
the noble Earl of Suffolk alsolies.
Suffolk first died.
York, all haggled over, comes tohim,
where in gore he lay insteeped,
takes him by the beard,
and kisses the gashes
that bloodily did yawn upon hisface.
He cries aloud, "Tarry, mycousin Suffolk.
"My soul shall thine keepcompany to heaven.
"Tarry, sweet soul, for mine,then fly abreast,
"as in this glorious andwell-foughten field
we--we kept together in ourchivalry."
Upon these words, I came andcheered him up.
He smiled me in the face, raughtme his hand,
and, with a feeble grip, says,"Dear my lord,
commend my service to mysovereign."
So did he turn,
and over Suffolk's neck,
he threw his wounded arm andkissed his lips.
And so espoused to death, withblood,
he sealed a testament ofnoble-ending love.
The pretty and sweet manner ofit
forced those waters from mewhich I would have stopped.
I had not so much of man in me,
and all my mother came into mineeyes
and gave me up to tears.
I blame you not,
for, hearing this,
I must perforce compound withmistful eyes,
or they will issue too.
But hark, what new alarum isthis same?
The French have reinforced theirscattered men.
Then every soldier kill hisprisoners.
Give the word through.
Kill the poys and the luggage!
'Tis expressly against the lawof arms!
'Tis as arrant a piece ofknavery,
mark you now, as can be offered.
In your conscience, is it not?
'Tis certain there's not a boyleft alive.
And the cowardly rascals thatran from the battle
have done this slaughter.
Besides, they have burned andcarried away
all that was in the king's tent.
Wherefore the king, mostworthily,
hath caused every soldier to cuthis prisoner's throat.
Oh, 'tis a gallant king.
Aye, he was born at Monmouth,Captain Gower.
What call you the name of thetown
where Alexander the Pig is born?
Alexander the Great.
Why, I pray you, is pig notgreat?
The pig or the great or the hugeor the mighty
or the magnificence?
It's all one reckoning,
save the phrase, a littlevariation.
I think Alexander the Great wasborn at Macedon.
His father was called Philip ofMacedon,
as I take it.
I think it is in Macedon whereAlexander is born.
I tell you, Captain,
if you look in the maps of the'orld,
I warrant you shall find
in the situations betweenMacedon and Monmouth
that the situations, look you,is both alike.
There is a river in Macedon.
There is also moreover a riverat Monmouth,
the Wye at Monmouth.
But it is out of my brains
what is the name of the otherriver.
But it is all one,
such as my fingers is to myfingers,
and there is salmons--
mm--
in both.
Oh, shh.
If you mark Alexander's lifewell,
Harry of Monmouth's life
is come after it indifferentwell,
for there is figures in allthings.
Alexander, God knows and youknow,
in his rages and his wraths
and his cholers and his moodsand his displeasures
and his indignations and alsobeing
a little intoxicates in hisbrains,
did, in his ales and his angers,kill his best friend, Cleitus.
Our king is not like him inthat.
He never killed any of hisfriends.
It is not well done, mark younow,
to take the tales out of mymouth
ere it is made and finished.
I speak but in the figures andcomparisons of it.
As Alexander did kill his friendCleitus,
in his ales and in his cups,
so also Harry Monmouth,
being in his right wits and hisgood judgments,
turned away the fat knight withthe great belly doublet.
He was full of jests and gipesand mocks and knaveries.
Oh, I forgot his name now.
Sir John Falstaff.
That is he.
I'll tell you, Captain,
there is good men born atMonmouth.
Here comes His Majesty.
I was not angry since I came toFrance
until this instant.
Take a trumpet, herald.
Ride thou unto the horsemen onyond hill.
If they will fight with us,
bid them come down or void thefield.
They do offend our sight.
If they'll do neither,
we'll come to them and make themskirr away,
as swift as stones enforced fromthe old Assyrian slings.
Besides, we'll cut the throatsof those we have,
and not a man of them that weshall take
shall taste our mercy!
Go and tell them so.
Here comes the herald of theFrench, my liege.
How now.
What means this, herald?
Comest thou again for ransom?
No, great king.
I come to thee for charitablelicense,
that we may wander o'er thisbloody field
to book our dead and then tobury them,
to sort our nobles from ourcommon men,
for many of our princes-- woethe while--
lie drowned and soaked inmercenary blood.
So do our vulgar drench theirpeasant limbs
in blood of princes,
and their wounded steeds fretfetlock deep in gore
and with wild rage
yerk out their armed heels attheir dead masters,
killing them twice.
Oh, give us leave, great king,to view the field in safety
and dispose of their deadbodies.
I tell thee truly, herald,
I know not if the day be ours orno,
for yet a many of your horsemenpeer and gallop o'er the field.
The day is yours.
Praised be God,
and not our strength, for it.
What is this castle called thatstands hard by?
They call it Agincourt.
Then call we this the field ofAgincourt,
fought on the day of CrispinCrispianus.
Your grandfather of famousmemory--
an't please Your Majesty--
and your great-uncle Edward, theBlack Prince of Wales,
as I have read in thechronicles,
fought a most famous battle herein France.
They did, Fluellen.
Your Majesty says very true.
If Your Majesties is rememberedof it,
the Welshmen did good service
in the garden where leeks didgrow,
wearing leeks in their Monmouthcaps,
which, Your Majesty know, tothis hour
to be an honorable badge of theservice.
And I do believe Your Majestytakes no scorn
to wear the leek upon SaintTavy's day.
I wear it for a memorable honor,
for I am Welsh, you know, goodcountryman.
All the water in Wye cannot wash
the Welsh blood out of YourMajesty's body,
I can tell you that!
God bless it and preserve it
as long as it pleases His Graceand His Majesty too!
Thanks, good my countryman.
By Jeshu, I am Your Majesty'scountryman!
I care not who know it!
I will confess it to all the'orld!
I need not be ashamed of YourMajesty, praised be God,
as long as Your Majesty is anhonest man.
God keep me so.
Our herald go with him,
and bring me just notice of thenumbers dead
on both our parts.
Call yonder fellow hither.
Soldier, you must come to theking.
Soldier, why wearest thou thatglove in thy cap?
Oh.
An't please Your Majesty,
it is the gage of one I shouldfight withal,
if he be alive.
An Englishman?
An't please Your Majesty,
a rascal that swaggered with melast night,
who, if ever dare challenge thisglove,
I have sworn to take him a boxo' the ear.
Or if I should see my glove inhis cap--
which he swore, as he were asoldier,
he would wear if alive--
I will strike it out soundly.
What think you, CaptainFluellen?
Is it fit this soldier keep hisoath?
He is a villain and a craven,
an't please Your Majesty, in myconscience.
Then keep thy vow, sirrah, whenthou meetest the fellow.
So I will, my liege, as I live.
Who servest thou under?
Under Captain Gower, my liege.
Call him hither to me, soldier.
Oh, I will, my liege.
Here, Fluellen.
Wear thou this favor for me andstick it in thy cap.
When Alencon and myself weredown together,
I plucked this glove from hishelm.
If any man challenge this,
he is a friend to Alencon and anenemy to our person.
If thou encounter any such,apprehend him,
an thou dost me love.
Your Grace does me
as great honors as can bedesired
in the hearts of his subjects.
I fain see the man that hath buttwo legs
that shall find himselfaggrieved at this glove.
That is all.
But I'd fain see it once,
an please God of His grace thatI might see.
Knowest thou Gower?
Oh, he is my very dear friend,an please you.
Pray thee, go seek him, andbring him to my tent.
I will fetch him.
My Lord of Warwick and mybrother Gloucester,
follow Fluellen closely at theheels.
Go you with me, Uncle Exeter.
I warrant it is to knight you,Captain.
God's will and his pleasure,Captain,
you must come apace to the king.
There is more good toward youperadventure
than is in your knowledge todream of.
Sir,
know you this glove?
Know the glove?
I know a glove is a glove.
Hmm.
I know this,
and therefore, I challenge it!
'Sblood!
An arrant a traitor as any is inthe universal world
or in France or in England!
How now, sir!
You villain.
Do you think I'll be forsworn?
Stand aside, Captain Gower!
I'll give his treason paymentinto plows, I warrant you!
I am no traitor!
That's a lie in thy throat!
I charge you in His Majesty'sname,
apprehend him!
He's a friend of the DukeAlencon's!
How now, how now.
What's the matter?
My Lord of Warwick, here is avillain,
and a contagious treason come tolight
as you shall desire in asummer's day.
Here is His Majesty.
How now, what's the matter?
My liege, here is a villain anda traitor
that has struck the glove
which Your Majesty
is take out of the helmet ofAlencon.
My liege, this was my glove.
Here is the fellow to it,
and he that I gave it to incharge
promised to wear it in his cap.
I promised to strike him if hedid.
I met this man with my glove inhis cap,
and I have been as good as myword.
Your Majesty hear now, savingYour Majesty's manhood,
what an arrant, rascally,beggarly, lousy knave it is.
I hope Your Majesty will bear mewitness and testament
and will avouchment
that this is the glove ofAlencon
which Your Majesty is give me.
In your conscience, now.
Give me thy glove, soldier.
Look, here is the fellow of it.
'Twas I, indeed, thou promisedstto strike.
And thou hast given me mostbitter terms.
Let his neck answer for it, anplease Your Majesty,
if there is any martial law inthe world.
How canst thou make mesatisfaction?
All offences, my lord, come fromthe heart.
Never came any from mine tooffend Your Majesty.
It was ourself thou didst abuse.
Your Majesty came not likeyourself.
You appeared to me but as acommon man.
Witness the night,
your garments, your lowliness,
and what Your Highness sufferedunder that shape,
I beseech you take for your ownfault and not mine,
for had you been as I took youfor,
I made no offence.
Therefore, I beseech YourHighness,
pardon me.
Here, Uncle Exeter.
Fill this glove with crowns,
and give it to this fellow.
Keep it, fellow,
and wear it for an honor in thycap
till I do challenge it.
Give him the crowns.
And, Captain, you must needs befriends with him.
By this day and this light,
the fellow hath enough mettle inhis belly.
Hold.
Here is, ah, 12 pence for you.
And I pray you to serve God
and keep you out of prawls
and prabbles and quarrels anddissensions,
I warrant you, it is the betterfor you.
I will none of your money.
Oh, come, it is with a goodwill.
It will serve to mend yourshoes.
Come, wherefore be you sobashful, huh?
Your shoes is not so good.
'Tis a good shilling.
Hmm?
Or I will change it.
Now, herald, are the deadnumbered?
Here is the number of theslaughtered French.
What prisoners of good sort aretaken, Uncle?
Charles, Duke of Orleans, nephewto the king.
John, Duke of Bourbon.
Lord Bouciqualt.
Of other lords, barons, knights,and squires,
full 1,500, besides common men.
This note doth tell me of 10,000French
that in the field lie slain.
Princes in this number andnobles bearing banners,
there lie dead 126.
Added to these, of knights,esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
8,400;
of the which, 500 were butyesterday dubbed knights;
so that in these 10,000 theyhave lost,
there are but 1,600 mercenaries.
The rest are princes, barons,lords, knights, and squires,
gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their noblesthat lie dead.
Charles Delabreth, HighConstable of France.
Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral ofFrance.
The master of the crossbows,Lord Rambures.
Great Master of France, thebrave Sir Guichard Dolphin.
John, Duke of Alencon.
Anthony, Duke of Brabant.
That's the brother to the Dukeof Burgundy.
And Edward, Duke of Bar.
Of lusty earls, Grandpre andRoussi,
Fauconbridge and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle,
Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Here was a royal fellowship ofdeath.
Where is the number of ourEnglish dead?
Edward, the Duke of York.
The Earl of Suffolk.
Sir Richard Ketly.
Davy Gam, Esquire.
None else...
of name.
And of all other men but 5 and20--
Oh, God, Thy arm was here.
And not to us, but to Thy armalone,
ascribe we all.
When, without stratagem,
but in plain shock and even playof battle,
was ever known so great andlittle loss
on one part and on the other?
Take it, God, for it is none butThine.
'Tis wonderful.
Come, go we in procession to thevillage.
And be it death proclaimedthrough our host
to boast of this or take thatpraise from God
which is His only.
Is it not lawful, an please YourMajesty,
to tell how many is killed?
Yes, Captain.
But with this acknowledgment,
that God fought for us.
Yes, my conscience, He did usgreat good.
Do we all holy rites.
Let there be sung, "Non nobis teDeum,"
the dead with charity enclosedin clay,
and then to Calais
and to England then,
and where ne'er from Francearrived more happy men.
Vouchsafe to those that have notread the story,
that I may prompt them.
And of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit theexcuse of time,
of numbers and due course ofthings,
which cannot in their huge andproper life
be here presented.
Now we bear the king towardCalais.
Grant him there.
There seen, heave him away uponyour winged thoughts
athwart the sea.
Behold, the English beach palesin the flood with men,
with wives and boys,
whose shouts and claps out-voicethe deep-mouthed sea,
which like a mighty whiffler'fore the king
seems to prepare his way.
So let him land, and solemnlysee him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thoughtthat even now
you may imagine him uponBlackheath,
where that his lords desire him
to have borne his bruised helmet
and his bended sword before himthrough the city.
He forbids it,
being free from vainness andself-glorious pride,
giving full trophy, signal, andostent
quite from himself to God.
But now behold,
in the quick forge and workinghouse of thought,
how London doth pour out hercitizens.
The mayor and all his brethrenin best sort,
like to the senators of theantique Rome
with the plebeians swarming attheir heels,
go forth and fetch theirconquering Caesar in.
As, by a lower but lovinglikelihood,
were now the general of ourgracious empress,
as in good time he may, fromIreland coming,
bringing rebellion broached onhis sword,
how many would the peaceful cityquit,
to welcome him.
Much more and much more causedid they this Harry.
Now in London place him.
As yet the lamentations of theFrench
invites the king of England'sstay at home--
the emperor's coming in behalfof France
to order peace between them--
and omit all the occurrences,whatever chanced,
till Harry's back return againto France.
There must we bring him,
and myself have played theinterim
by remembering you 'tis past.
Then brook abridgment,
and your eyes advance after yourthoughts,
straight back again to France.
Nay, that's right.
But why wear you your leektoday?
Saint Davy's day is past.
There is occasions and causeswhy and wherefore in all things.
I will tell you as my friend,Captain Gower.
The rascally, scald, beggarly,lousy, pragging knave, Pistol,
which you and yourself and allthe world know
to be a man of no merits,
he is come to me yesterday andbrings me bread and salt
and bids me eat my leek.
It was in a place
where I could bear no contentionwith him.
But I'll be so bold as to wearmy leek in my cap
till I see him again,
and then I will tell him alittle piece of my desires.
Here he comes, swelling like aturkey-cock.
'Tis no matter for his swellingsnor his turkey-cocks.
God bless you, Aunchient Pistol!
You scurvy, lousy knave, Godbless you.
Ha!
Art thou bedlam?
Would'st thou have me fold upParca's fatal web?
Hence.
I am qualmish at the smell ofleek.
I beseech you heartily, scurvy,lousy knave,
at my requests and my petitionsand my desires
to eat, look you, this leek,
because, look you, you do notlove it,
nor your affections and yourappetites
and your digestions does notagree with it,
I would desire you therefore toeat it.
Not for Cadwallader and all hisgoats.
Ow!
Ah!
There is one goat for you.
Oh!
Will you be so good, scaldknave, as eat it?
Base Troyan, thou shalt die.
You say very true, scald knave,when God's will is.
I will desire you to live in themeantime
and eat your victuals.
Come, there is sauce for it.
Ow!
Bite, I pray you.
It's good for your green woundand your bloody coxcomb.
Must I bite?
Yes, certainly, out of doubt
and out of question too
and ambiguities.
By this leek, I will be mosthorribly revenged.
I eat--I eat, I swear!
Eat, I pray you.
Will you have some more sauce toyour leek?
I have another leek in mypocket.
There's not enough leek to swearby.
Quiet thy cudgel!
Thou dost see I eat.
Much good do you, heartily,scald knave.
Oh, no, throw none away.
The skin is good for your brokencoxcomb.
God be wi' you and keep you
and heal your pate.
Doth Fortune play the huswifewith me now?
News have I that my Nell is deadi' the spital
of malady of France.
And there, my rendezvous isquite cut off.
Old I do wax.
And from my weary limbs, honoris cudgelled.
Well, bawd I'll turn
and something lean to cutpurseof quick hand.
To England will I steal,
and there, I'll steal.
And patches will I get untothese scars,
and say I got them in the Galliawars.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Peace to this meeting, whereforewe are met.
Unto our brother France and toour sister,
health and fair time of day.
Joy and good wishes
to our most fair and princelycousin Katharine.
And as a branch and member ofthis royalty
by whom this great assembly iscontrived,
we do salute you, Duke ofBurgundy.
And princes French and peers,health to you all.
Right joyous are we to beholdyour face,
most worthy brother England.
Fairly met.
And so are you, princes English,every one.
So happy be the issue, brotherEngland,
of this good day and of thisgracious meeting
as we are now glad to beholdyour eyes,
your eyes, which hitherto haveborne in them
against the French that met themin their bent
the fatal balls of murderingbasilisks.
The venom of such looks, wefairly hope,
have lost their quality
and that this day shall change
all griefs and quarrels intolove.
To cry amen to that, thus weappear.
You English princes all,
I do salute you.
My duty to you both, on equallove,
great kings of France andEngland.
That I have labored
with all my wits, my pains, andstrong endeavors
to bring Your Most ImperialMajesties
unto this barand royalinterview,
your mightiness on both partsbest can witness.
Since then, my office hath sofar prevailed
that, face to face and royal eyeto eye,
you have congreeted,
let it not disgrace me
if I demand, before this royalview,
what rub or what impedimentthere is,
why that the naked, poor, andmangled peace--
dear nurse of arts, plenties,and joyful births--
should not in this best gardenof the world,
our fertile France,
put up her lovely visage?
Alas, from France, she hath toolong been chased,
and all her husbandry doth lieon heaps,
corrupting in its own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer ofthe heart,
unpruned dies.
Her hedges even-pleached,
like prisoners wildly overgrownwith hair,
put forth disordered twigs.
Her fallow leas,
the darnel, hemlock, and rankfumitory
doth root upon,
while that the coulter rusts
that should deracinate suchsavagery.
The even mead
that erst brought sweetly forth
the freckled cowslip, burnet,and green clover,
wanting the scythe, alluncorrected, rank,
conceives by idleness,
and nothing teems but hatefuldocks,
rough thistles, kexes, burs,
losing both beauty and utility.
And as our vineyards, fallows,meads, and hedges,
defective in their natures, growto wildness,
even so our houses and ourselvesand children have lost
or do not learn for want of time
the sciences that should becomeour country
but grow like savages--
as soldiers will that nothing dobut meditate on blood--
to swearing and stern looks,diffused attire,
and everything that seemsunnatural,
which to reduce into our formerfavor
you are assembled.
And my speech entreats that Imay know the let,
why gentle peace
should not expel theseinconveniences
and bless us
with her former qualities.
If, Duke of Burgundy, you wouldthe peace,
whose want gives growth
to the imperfections which youhave cited,
you must buy that peace
with full accord to all our justdemands,
whose tenors and particulareffects
you have enscheduled briefly inyour hands.
The king hath heard them.
To the which, as yet, there isno answer made.
Well, then, the peace,
which you before so urged,
lies in his answer.
I have but with a cursorary eyeo'erglanced the articles.
Pleaseth Your Grace
to appoint some of your council
presently to sit with us oncemore,
with better heed to re-surveythem,
and we will suddenly pass
our accept and peremptoryanswer.
Brother, we shall.
Go, Uncle Exeter and BrotherClarence
and you, Brother Gloucester andWarwick too.
Go with the king,
and take with you free power toratify, augment, or alter
as your wisdoms best shall seeadvantagable for our dignity,
anything in or out of ourdemands,
and we'll consign thereto.
Will you,
fair sister,
go with the princes or stay herewith us?
Our gracious brother, I will gowith them.
Haply, a woman's voice may dosome good
when articles too nicely urgedbe stood on.
Yet leave our cousin Katharinehere with us.
She is our capital demand,
comprised within the fore-rankof our articles.
She hath good leave.
Fair Katharine, and most fair,
will you vouchsafe to teach asoldier
terms such as will enter at alady's ear
and plead his love suit
to her gentle heart?
Your Majesty shall at mock me.
I cannot speak your England.
Oh, fair Katharine,
if you will love me soundly withyour French heart,
I will be glad to hear youconfess it brokenly
with your English tongue.
Do you like me, Kate?
Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tellwhat is "like me."
An angel is like you, Kate,
and you are like an angel.
Que dit-il?
Que je suis semblable a lesanges?
Oui, vraiment, sauf votre grace,ainsi dit-il.
I said so, dear Katharine,
and I must not blush to affirmit.
Oh, bon Dieu.
Les langues des hommes sontpleines de tromperies.
What says she, fair one?
That the tongues of men are fullof deceits?
Oui, dat de tongues of de mansis be full of deceit.
That is the princess.
The princess is the betterEnglishwoman.
I' faith, Kate, my wooing is fitfor thy understanding.
I'm glad thou canst speak nobetter English,
for if thou couldst,
thou would find me such a plainking
thou would think I'd sold myfarm
to buy my crown.
I know no ways to mince it inlove
but directly to say, "I loveyou."
Then if you urge me farther thanto say, "Do you i' faith?"
I wear out my suit.
Give me your answer.
I' faith, do.
And so clap hands and a bargain.
How say you, lady?
Sauf votre honneur, meunderstand well.
Marry, if you would put me toverses
or to dance for your sake, Kate,
why, you undid me.
For the one, I have neitherwords nor measure.
For the other, I have nostrength in measure,
yet a reasonable measure instrength.
If I could win a lady atleapfrog
or by vaulting into my saddlewith my armor on my back,
under the correction of braggingbe it spoke,
I should quickly leap into awife.
Or if I might buffet for my love
or bound my horse for herfavors,
I could lay on like a butcher,
sit like a jackanapes, neveroff.
But, before God, Kate,
I cannot look greenly
nor gasp out my eloquence,
nor I have no cunning inprotestation,
only downright oaths,
which I never use till urged
nor never break for urging.
If thou canst love a fellow ofthis temper, Kate,
whose face is not worthsunburning,
who never looks in his glass
for love of anything he seesthere,
let thine eye be thy cook.
I speak to thee plain soldier.
If thou canst love me for this,take me.
If not, to say to thee that Ishall die is true.
But for thy love, by the Lord,no.
And yet I love thee too.
Whilst thou livest, dear Kate,
take a fellow of plain anduncoined constancy,
for he perforce must do theeright,
because he hath not the gift towoo in other places.
These fellows of infinite tongue
that can rhyme themselves intoladies' favors,
they do always reason themselvesout again.
What?
A speaker is but a prater.
A rhyme is but a ballad.
A good leg will fall.
A straight back will stoop.
A black beard will turn white.
A curled pate will grow bald.
A fair face will wither
and a full eye wax hollow,
but a good heart, Kate,
is the sun and moon--
or rather the sun and not themoon,
for it shines bright
and never changes
but keeps his course truly.
If thou would have such a one,
take me.
And take me, take a soldier.
Take a soldier, take a king.
What sayest thou, then, to mylove?
Speak, my fair, and fairly, Ipray thee.
Is it possible dat I should lovede enemy of France?
No, it is not possible
that you should love the enemyof France, Kate.
But in loving me,
you should love the friend ofFrance,
for I love France so well,
I will not part with a villageof it.
I will have it all mine.
Kate, when France is mine
and I am yours,
then yours is France, and youare mine.
I cannot tell what is dat.
No, Kate.
I will tell thee in French,
which I am sure will hang uponmy tongue
as a newly married wife abouther husband's neck,
hardly to be shook off.
Je...
quand sur le possession deFrance...
et quand vous avez le possessionde moi--
Let me see, what then?
Saint Denis be my speed.
Donc votre est France et vousetes mienne.
It is as easy for me, Kate, toconquer the kingdom
as to speak so much more French.
I shall never move thee inFrench, Kate,
unless it be to laugh at me.
But dost thou understand thusmuch English?
Canst thou love me?
I cannot tell.
Can any of your neighbors tell,Kate?
I'll ask them.
Come, I know thou lovest me.
And at night, when you come intoyour closet,
you'll question this gentlewomanabout me.
And I know, Kate, you will toher dispraise
those parts in me you love withyour heart.
But, good Kate, mock memercifully.
The rather, gentle princess,because I love thee cruelly.
If ever thou beest mine,
as I have a saving faith withinme tells me thou shalt,
I get thee with scambling,
and thou must therefore needsprove
a good soldier breeder.
Shall not thou and I,
between Saint Denis and SaintGeorge,
compound a boy, half French,half English,
who'll go to Constantinople andtake the Turk by the beard?
Shall we not?
What sayest thou, my fairflower-de-luce?
I do not know dat.
No, 'tis hereafter to know butnow to promise.
Do but now promise, Kate, youwill endeavor
for your French part of such aboy.
And for my English moiety,
take the word of a king and abachelor.
How answer you,
la plus belle Katherine dumonde,
mon tres cher et divin deesse?
Your Majestee have false Frenchenough
to deceive de most sagedamoiselle
dat is en France.
Now, fie upon my false French.
By mine honor, in true English,I love thee, Kate.
By which honor I dare not swearthou lovest me,
yet my blood begins to flatterme that thou dost.
Therefore tell me, most fairKatharine,
will you have me?
Put off your maiden blushes.
Avouch the thoughts of yourheart
with the looks of an empress.
Take me by the hand,
and say, "Harry of England, I amthine,"
which word thou shalt no soonerbless mine ear withal,
but I shall tell thee aloud,
"England is thine,
"Ireland is thine,
"France is thine,
and Henry Plantagenet is thine."
Though I speak it before hisface,
if he be not fellow with thebest king,
thou shalt find the best king ofgood fellows.
Come, your answer in brokenmusic,
for thy voice is music and thyEnglish broken.
Therefore, queen of all,Katharine,
break thy mind to me in brokenEnglish.
Wilt thou have me?
That is as it shall please deroi mon pere.
Nay, it will please him well,Kate.
It shall please him, Kate.
Den it shall also content me.
Upon that, I kiss your hand andcall you my queen.
Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez,laissez!
Ma foi, je ne veux point
que vous abaissez votre grandeuren baisant la main
d'une de votre seigeurie indigneserviteur.
Excusez-moi,
je vous supplie,
mon tres-puissant seigneur.
Then I will kiss your lips,Kate.
Les dames et demoiselles
pour etre baisees devant leurnoces,
il n'est pas la coutume deFrance.
Madame my interpreter, what saysshe?
Dat it is not be de fashion pourles ladies of France--
I cannot tell what is baiser enAnglish.
To kiss.
Your Majestee entendre bettreque moi.
It is not a fashion for themaids in France
to kiss before they are married,would she say?
Oui, vraiment.
Oh, Kate, nice customs curtsy togreat kings.
Dear Kate, you and I
cannot be confined within theweak list
of a country's fashion.
We are the makers of manners,Kate.
The liberty that follows ourplaces
stops the mouth of allfindfaults...
as I will do yours
for upholding the nice fashionof your country
in denying me a kiss.
Therefore, patiently andyielding.
You have witchcraft in yourlips, Kate.
There is more eloquence in asugar touch of them
than in the tongues of theFrench council.
And they should sooner persuadeHenry of England
than a general petition ofmonarchs.
Here comes your father.
God save Your Majesty.
My royal cousin, teach you ourprincess English?
I would have her learn, my faircousin,
how perfectly I love her.
And that is good English.
We have consented to all termsof reason.
Is't so, my lords of England?
The king hath granted everyarticle.
His daughter first and then insequel all
according to their firm proposednatures.
Take her, fair son,
and from her blood,
raise up issue to me
that the contending kingdoms ofFrance and England,
whose very shores look pale withenvy
of each other's happiness,
may cease their hatred.
And this dear conjunction
plant neighborhood andChristian-like accord
in their sweet bosoms,
that never war advance hisbleeding sword
'twixt England
and fair France.
Amen.
Now, welcome, Kate.
And bear me witness all,
that here I kiss her as mysovereign queen.
God, the best maker of allmarriages,
combine your hearts in one, yourrealms in one.
As man and wife, being two, areone in love,
so be there 'twixt your kingdomssuch a spousal
that never may ill office orfell jealousy,
which troubles oft the bed ofblessed marriage,
thrust in between the paction ofthese kingdoms
to make divorce of theirincorporate league,
that English may as French,French Englishmen,
receive each other.
God speak this Amen.
Amen.
Prepare we for our marriage,
on which day, my Lord ofBurgundy,
we'll take your oath,
and all the peers', for suretyof our leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate
and you to me.
And may our oaths well kept andprosperous be.
Thus far, with rough andall-unable pen,
our bending author hath pursuedthe story,
in little room confining mightymen,
mangling by starts the fullcourse of their glory.
Small time,
but in that small,
most greatly lived this star ofEngland.
Fortune made his sword,
by which the world's best gardenhe achieved
and of it left his son imperiallord.
Henry VI, in infant bands
crowned King Of France andEngland,
did this king succeed,
whose state so many had themanaging
that they lost France and madehis England bleed,
which oft our stage hath shown,
and for their sake,
in your fair minds,
let this acceptance take.